                                            The Apparent Anomalous, Weak, Long-Range
                                                Acceleration of Pioneer 10 and 11†§
                                                         Slava G. Turyshev,a John D. Anderson,b Philip A. Laing,c
                                                        Eunice L.Lau,d Anthony S. Liu,e and Michael Martin Nietof




arXiv:gr-qc/9903024v2 9 Mar 1999
                                       a,b,d Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91109

                                           c The Aerospace Corporation, 2350 E. El Segundo Blvd., El Segundo, CA 90245-4691

                                                 e Astrodynamic Sciences, 2393 Silver Ridge Ave., Los Angeles, CA 90039

                                                   f Theoretical Division (MS-B285), Los Alamos National Laboratory,

                                                              University of California, Los Alamos, NM 87545

                                                                                    Abstract
                                               Recently we reported that radio Doppler data generated by NASA’s Deep Space Network
                                           (DSN) from the Pioneer 10 and 11 spacecraft indicate an apparent anomalous, constant,
                                           spacecraft acceleration with a magnitude ∼ 8.5 × 10−8 cm s−2 , directed towards the Sun
                                           [1]. Analysis of similar Doppler and ranging data from the Galileo and Ulysses spacecraft
                                           yielded ambiguous results for the anomalous acceleration, but it was useful in that it ruled
                                           out the possibility of a systematic error in the DSN Doppler system that could easily have
                                           been mistaken as a spacecraft acceleration. Here we present some new results, including a
                                           critique suggestions that the anomalous acceleration could be caused by collimated thermal
                                           emission. Based partially on a further data for the Pioneer 10 orbit determination, the data
                                           now spans January 1987 to July 1998, our best estimate of the average Pioneer 10 acceleration
                                           directed towards the Sun is ∼ 7.5 × 10−8 cm s−2 .


                                   1       Introduction
                                   Detailed analyses of radio metric data from distant spacecraft in the solar system have revealed
                                   an anomalous acceleration acting on Pioneer 10 and 11, with supporting data from Galileo,
                                   and Ulysses spacecraft. These data indicated existence of an apparent anomalous, constant,
                                   acceleration acting on the spacecraft with a magnitude ∼ 8.5 × 10−8 cm/s2 , directed towards the
                                   Sun [1]. Two independent codes and physical strategies were used to analyze the data. A number
                                   of potential causes have been ruled out. In this paper we report on further progress in this study.
                                       We concentrate on the analysis of the Pioneer 10 and 11 spacecraft Doppler data. We will
                                   discuss scenarios that involve excess power and heat generated by the Radioisotope Thermoelec-
                                   tric Generators (RTGs). We will present our estimates for the corresponding effects in order to
                                   demonstrate that these mechanisms can not as yet explain the reported effect.

                                       †
                                        Presented at XXXIV-th Rencontres de Moriond Meeting on Gravitational Waves and Experimental Gravity.
                                   Les Arcs, Savoi, France (January 23-30, 1999)


                                                                                        1
2     Study of the anomalous acceleration
The Pioneer spacecraft are excellent for dynamical astronomy studies. Due to their spin-
stabilization and their great distances, a minimum number of Earth-attitude reorientation maneu-
vers are required. To obtain the S-band Doppler data from the Pioneer spacecraft, NASA used
the Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s (JPL) Deep Space Network (DSN). The signals were actively
reflected by a transponder on the spacecraft and calculation of the motions of the spacecraft were
made based on the resulting Doppler shift in the signals. This data was used to determine the
Pioneers position, velocity and the magnitudes of the orientation maneuvers.


2.1   The studies of unmodeled acceleration at JPL.

Beginning in 1980, when at 20 AU the solar radiation pressure acceleration had decreased to < 5×
10−8 cm/s2 , JPL’s Orbit Determination Program (ODP) analysis of unmodeled accelerations (at
first with the faster-moving Pioneer 10) found that the biggest systematic error in the acceleration
residuals is a constant bias of aP ∼ (8 ± 3) × 10−8 cm/s2 , directed toward the Sun (to within the
accuracy of the Pioneers’ antennae).
    We ultimately concluded [1] that there is an unmodeled acceleration, aP , towards the Sun
of (8.09 ± 0.20) × 10−8 cm/s2 for Pioneer 10 and of (8.56 ± 0.15) × 10−8 cm/s2 for Pioneer 11.
The error is determined by use of a five-day batch sequential filter with radial acceleration as
a stochastic parameter subject to white Gaussian noise (∼ 500 independent five-day samples of
radial acceleration). No magnitude variation of aP with distance was found, within a sensitivity
of 2 × 10−8 cm/s2 over a range of 40 to 60 AU. All errors are from the covariance matrices
associated with the least–squares analysis. The assumed data errors are larger than the standard
error on the post–fit residuals [1].
    The observed effect may be expressed by the following simple expression:
                                                       aP · t
                                                               
                                 νobs   = νmodel × 1 −              ,                           (1)
                                                         c
where νobs is the frequency of the re-transmitted signal observed by a DSN antennae, while νmodel
is the predicted frequency of that signal. Our analyses were were modeled to include the effects
of planetary perturbations, radiation pressure, the interplanetary media, general relativity, and
bias and drift in the Doppler signal. Planetary coordinates and the solar system masses were
obtained using JPL’s Export Planetary Ephemeris DE200. The analyses calculated Earth’s polar
motion and its non-uniform rotation using the International Earth Rotation Service.
    The models account for a number of post-Newtonian perturbations in the dynamics of the
planets, the Moon, and spacecraft: i) models for light propagation are correct to order (v/c)2 , ii)
the equations of motion of extended celestial bodies are valid to order (v/c)4 . Non-gravitational
effects, such as solar radiation pressure and precessional attitude-control maneuvers, make small
contributions to the apparent acceleration we have observed. The solar radiation pressure de-
creases as r −2 . As previously indicated for the Pioneers, at distances >10-15 AU it produces an
acceleration that is much less than 8 × 10−8 cm/s2 , directed away from the Sun. (The solar wind
is roughly a factor of 100 smaller than this.)
    As possible “perturbative forces” to explain this bias, we considered gravity from the Kuiper
belt, gravity from the galaxy, spacecraft “gas leaks,” errors in the planetary ephemeris, and
errors in the accepted values of the Earth’s orientation, precession, and nutation. None of these
“forces” could explain the apparent acceleration, and some were two orders of magnitude or more
too small.


                                                 2
2.2    An error in the code? — The Aerospace Corporation’s result.

With no explanation of this data in hand, our attention focused on the possibility that there
was some error in JPL’s ODP. To investigate this, an independent analysis of the raw data using
The Aerospace Corporation’s Compact High Accuracy Satellite Motion Program (CHASMP),
which was developed independently of JPL’s ODP, was performed. Although, by necessity, both
programs use the same physical principles, planetary ephemeris, and timing and polar motion
inputs, the algorithms are otherwise quite different. If there were an error in either program, they
would not agree. (Common program elements continue to be investigated.)
     The CHASMP analysis of Pioneer 10 data also showed an unmodeled acceleration in a di-
rection along the radial toward the Sun. The value is (8.65 ± 0.03) × 10−8 cm/s2 , agreeing with
JPL’s result. The smaller error here is because the CHASMP analysis used a batch least-squares
fit over the whole orbit, not looking for a variation of the magnitude of aP with distance.
    Without using the apparent acceleration, CHASMP shows a steady frequency drift1 of about
−6 × 10−9 Hz/s, or 1.5 Hz over 8 years (one-way only). The drift in the Doppler residuals
(observed minus computed data) is clear, definite, and cannot be removed without the added
acceleration, aP . If there were a systematic drift in the atomic clocks of the DSN or in the time-
reference standard signals, this would appear like a non-uniformity of time; i.e., all clocks would
be changing with a constant acceleration. We now have been able to rule out this possibility.
    In addition to our previous analysis [1], we have examined numerous “time” models (in con-
junction with our studies of Galileo and Ulysses spacecraft radio metric data), searching for any
(possibly radical) solution, namely: i). Drifting Clocks. This model adds a constant acceleration
term to the Station Time (ST) clocks; i.e.. in the ST-UTC (Universal Time Coordinates) time
transformation. The model fit Doppler well for Pioneer 10, Galileo, and Ulysses but failed to
model range data for Galileo and Ulysses. ii). Quadratic Time Augmentation. This model adds
a quadratic-in-time augmentation to the IAT-ET (International Atomic Time-Ephemeris Time)
time transformation. The model fits Doppler fairly well but range very badly. iii). Frequency
Drift. This model adds a constant frequency drift to the reference frequency. The model also fits
Doppler well but again fits range poorly. iv). Expanding Space. This model adds a quadratic in
time term to the light time, thus mimicking a line of sight acceleration of the spacecraft. The
model fits both Doppler and range very well but the coefficient of the quadratic is negative for
Pioneer 10 and Galileo while positive for Ulysses. v) Speed of Gravity. This model adds a “light
time” delay to the actions of the Sun and planets upon the spacecraft. The model fits Pioneer 10
and Ulysses well. But the Earth flyby of Galileo fit was terrible, with Doppler residuals as high
as 20 Hz.
   All these models were rejected due either to poor fits or to inconsistent solutions among
spacecraft.


3     Influence of the excess power and heat from RTGs.
One might argue that a possible systematic explanation of the residuals is non-isotropic thermal
radiation. Pu238 radioactive thermal generators (RTGs) power the Pioneers.

   1
     The JPL and DSN convention for Doppler frequency shift is ∆ν = ν − ν0 , where ν is the measured frequency
and ν0 is the reference frequency. It is positive for a spacecraft receding from the tracking station (red shift), and
negative for a spacecraft approaching the station (blue shift), just the opposite of the usual convention.




                                                          3
3.1      The heat coming from the RTGs.

Let us discuss the anisotropic heat reflection off of the back of the spacecraft high-gain antennae,
the heat coming from the RTGs [2]. Before launch the four RTGs delivered a total electrical
power of 160 W (now ∼ 70-75 W), from a total thermal fuel inventory of 2580 W (now ∼ 2090
W). Presently ∼ 2000 W of RTG heat must be dissipated. Only ∼ (70 − 85) W of directed power
could explain the anomaly. Therefore, in principle there is enough power to explain the anomaly
this way. However, there are two reasons that preclude such a mechanism, namely:
    i). The spacecraft geometry. The RTGs are located at the end of booms, and rotate about the
craft in a plane that contains the approximate base of the antenna. From the RTGs the antenna
is thus seen “edge on” and subtends a solid angle of ∼ 1.5 % of 4π steradians. This already means
the proposal could provide at most ∼ 30 W. But there is more.
   ii) The RTG’s radiation pattern. The above estimate was based on the assumption that the
RTGs are spherical black bodies. But they are not. The main bodies of the RTGs are cylinders
and they are grouped in two packages of two. Each package has the two cylinders end to end
extending away from the antenna. Every RTG has six fins that go radially out from the cylinder.
Thus, the fins are “edge on” to the antenna (the fins point perpendicular to the cylinder axes).
Ignoring edge effects, this means that only 2.5 % of the surface area of the RTGs is facing the
antenna. Further, for better radiation from the fins, the Pioneer SNAP 19 RTGs had larger fins
than the earlier test models, and the packages were insulated so that the end caps had lower
temperatures and radiated less than the cylinder/fins [3]. As a result of such a design, the vast
majority of the heat radiated by the RTG’s is symmetrically directed in space unobscured by the
antenna
   We conclude that this mechanism does not provide enough power to explain the Pioneer
anomaly.


3.2      Non-isotropic radiative cooling of the spacecraft.

There is also the possibility that the anomalous acceleration seen in the Pioneer 10/11 spacecraft
can be, “explained, at least in part, by non-isotropic radiative cooling of the spacecraft ”[4]. So,
the question is, does “at least in part” mean this effect comes near to explaining the anomaly?
We argue it does not.
    Consider radiation of the power of the main-bus electrical systems from the rear of the craft.
For the Pioneers, the aft has a louver system, and “the louver system acts to control the heat
rejection of the radiating platform... A bimetallic spring, thermally coupled radiatively to the
platform, provides the motive force for altering the angle of each blade. In a closed position the
heat rejection of the platform is minimized by virtue of the “blockage” of the blades while open
louvers provide the platform with a nearly unobsructed view of space” [5].
    If these louvers were open, this mechanism could produce a comparable effect. However, by
9 AU the actuator spring temperature had already reached ∼40◦ F. This means the louver doors
were closed (i.e., the louver angle was zero) from there on out. Thus, from our quoting of the
radiation properties above, the contribution of the thermal radiation to the Pioneer anomalous
acceleration should be negligibly small. After the above time, we reach our data region. In 1984
Pioneer 10 was at about 33 AU and the power was about 105 W. (Always reduce the total power
numbers by 8 W to account for the radio beam power.) In (1987, 1992, 1996) the craft was at
∼(41, 55, 65) AU and the power was ∼(95, 80, 70) W. The louvers were inactive, and no decrease
in aP was seen2 .
  2
      Any change of the louver angle should result in a spin change due to the thermal radiation. This is because of


                                                          4
    We conclude that this proposal can not explain the anomalous Pioneer acceleration.


3.3    Could the Helium pressure produced within the RTGs be the cause for
       the acceleration?

Another possible systematic from on-board the spacecraft, is from the He build-up in the RTGs
due to the α-decay of Pu238 . Is there any way that this permeating He could be causing aP ?
    To make this mechanism work, one would need that the He leackage from the RTGs be
preferentially directed away from the Sun, with a velocity large enough to cause the acceleration.
The SNAP-19 Pioneer RTGs were designed in a such a way that the He pressure has not been
totally contained within the Pioneer heat source over the life of RTGs. Instead, the Pioneer
heat source contains a pressure relief device which allows the generated He to vent out of the
heat source and into the thermoelectric converter. (The strength member and the capsule clad
contain small holes to permit He to escape into the thermoelectric converter.) The thermoelectric
converter housing-to-power output receptacle interface is sealed with a viton O-ring. This means
that, due to permeation, the gas within the converter is expected to be released to the space
environment throughout the mission life of the Pioneer RTGs.
     From the size of the fuel pucks, the total volume of fuel is about 904 cm3 . The fuel is PMC Pu
conglomerate. The amount of Pu238 in this fuel is about 5.8 kg. With a decay constant of 87.74
years, that means the rate of He production (from Pu decay) is about 0.8 gm/year, assuming it
all leaves the cermet. Finally, kT on the surface of the RTGs corresponds to less than 103 km/sec
for He. (When looking for gas leaks, see below, we found that 2 gr/year mass of hydrazine could
produce aP if it came out at nozzle speed of about 3.4 km/sec, all directed.)
    So, we can rule out this helium permeating through the O-rings as the cause of our effect.


4     Recent results
Recently we began using new JPL software (SIGMA) to reduce the Pioneer 10 Doppler data
to 50-day averages of acceleration, extending from January 1987 to July 1998, over a distance
interval from 40 to 69 AU (see Figure 1). Before mid-1990, the spacecraft rotation rate changed
(slowed) by about -0.065 rev/day/day. Between mid-1990 and mid-1992 the spin-deceleration
increased to -0.4 rev/day/day. But after mid-1992 the spin rate remained ∼ constant. In units
of 10−8 cm/s2 , the mean acceleration levels obtained by SIGMA from the Doppler data in these
periods are: (7.94 ± 0.11) before mid-1990, (8.39 ± 0.14) between mid-1990 and mid-1992, and
(7.29 ± 0.17) after mid-1992. [Similar values (8.27 ± 0.05, 8.77 ± 0.04, 7.76 ± 0.08) were obtained
using CHASMP.] We detect no long-term deceleration changes from mid-1992 to mid-1998, and
only two spin-related discontinuities over the entire data period.
    We have also performed a number of tests of the internal consistency of our analysis of aP .
Internal tests included numerous examinations of the fit results for various aspects of the theo-
retical model related to station coordinates, Earth orientation parameters, precession, nutation,
instrumental clock stability, interplanetary plasma effects, and relativistic effects. The numerical
stability of the estimation algorithm and its computer implementation are also considered. Fi-
nally, the stability of the solution was examined in detail, in terms of time-dependent changes of
both the aP and the spacecraft spin-down rate.
    The internal consistency tests indicate that, in addition to the formal uncertainties, there
is evidence for a systematic mismodeling which results in an annual periodic term (plot B in
the orientation of the lovers around the bus on the spacecraft. We detect no such a change.


                                                       5
Figure 1). This term has been found in the residuals of the both Pioneers and is currently
being investigated. Such systematic errors lead to estimates of realistic uncertainties that are
approximately two times the formal uncertainties.
    Assume that the slowing of the spin rate was caused by spacecraft systems that also account
for a few % systematic effect. Then, excluding other biases, such as the radio beam increasing the
anomaly, we should adopt the post-1992 value as the most accurate measure of the anomalous
acceleration of Pioneer 10.
    As stated before, we believe the most plausible explanation of the anomaly is systematics, such
as radiant heat or gas leaks. But no such explanation has yet been demonstrated. Clearly, more
analysis, observation, and theoretical work are called for. Further details will appear elsewhere.


Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Pioneer Project, NASA/Ames Research Center, and was per-
formed at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under contract with
NASA. P.A.L. and A.S.L. acknowledge support by a grant from NASA through the Ultraviolet,
Visible, and Gravitational Astrophysics Program. M.M.N. acknowledges support by the U.S.
DOE.


References

[§]   Electronic addresses:   turyshev@jpl.nasa.gova , john.d.anderson@jpl.nasa.govb , Philip.A.
      Laing@aero.orgc , eunice@helen.jpl.nasa.govd , SZLiu@aol.come , mmn@pion.lanl.govf .

 [1] J. D. Anderson, P. A. Laing, E. L. Lau, A. S. Liu, M. M. Nieto, and S. G. Turyshev, Phys.
      Rev. Lett. 81, 2858 (1998). gr-qc/9808081.

 [2] J. I. Katz, gr-qc/9809070.

 [3] S. T. Christenbury, private communications, and: Teledyne report IESD 2873-172, June,
      1973, tech. report no. DOE/ET/13512-T1; DE85017964, gov. doc. no. E 1.9.

 [4] E. M. Murphy, gr-qc/9810015.

 [5] Pioneer Project NASA/ARC document No. PC-202.




                                                   6
Figure 1: The Pioneer 10 Doppler data: 50-day averages of anomalous acceleration – January
1987 to July 1998.




                                            7
