                                                            Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template




arXiv:2303.01821v2 [gr-qc] 25 Jul 2023
                                          Testing Theories of Gravity with Planetary

                                                                    Ephemerides

                                                     Agnès Fienga1,2* and Olivier Minazzoli3,4
                                              1
                                                Geoazur, Observatoire de la Côte d’Azur, Av. A. Einstein,
                                                            Sophia-Antipolis, 06560, France.
                                         2
                                           IMCCE, Observatoire de Paris, Av. Denfert-Rocheau, Paris, 75014,
                                                                         France.
                                         3
                                           ARTEMIS, Observatoire de la Côte d’Azur, Av. Observatoire, Nice,
                                                                     06560, France.
                                            4
                                              Bureau des Affaires Spatiales, 2 rue du Gabian, Monaco, 98000,
                                                                         Monaco.


                                             *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): agnes.fienga@oca.eu;


                                                                            Abstract
                                          We describe here how planetary ephemerides are built in the framework
                                          of General Relativity and how they can be used to test alternative theo-
                                          ries. We focus on the definition of the reference frame (space and time)
                                          in which the planetary ephemeris is described, the equations of motion
                                          that govern the orbits of solar system bodies and electromagnetic waves.
                                          After a review on the existing planetary and lunar ephemerides, we sum-
                                          marize the results obtained considering full modifications of the ephemeris
                                          framework with direct comparisons with the observations of planetary sys-
                                          tems, with a specific attention for the PPN formalism. We then discuss
                                          other formalisms such as Einstein-dilaton theories, the massless graviton and
                                          MOND. The paper finally concludes on some comments and recommen-
                                          dations regarding misinterpreted measurements of the advance of perihelia.




                                                                               1
                         Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


2     CONTENTS

Contents

1   Introduction                                                                       4


2   Basic concepts behind planetary ephemerides                                        8

    2.1   Prerequisites: A Brief Primer on general relativity . . . . . . . . . . .    8

          2.1.1    Newton’s theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     8

          2.1.2    Proper time in special relativity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

          2.1.3    Free fall and proper time in general relativity . . . . . . . . . 13

          2.1.4    Einstein-Hilbert equation and the Newtonian approximation . 16

          2.1.5    Invariance of the laws through a change of coordinate system       22

          2.1.6    The action of general relativity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27

          2.1.7    The post-Newtonian approximation of general relativity and

                   gauge invariance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29

          2.1.8    The Einstein-Infeld-Hoffman-Droste-Lorentz equation of

                   motion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33

          2.1.9    The propagation of light in general relativity . . . . . . . . . 35

          2.1.10 Alternative gravitational theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40

    2.2   Basics on Ephemeris . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40


3   Planetary and lunar ephemerides in General relativity                             45

    3.1   State-of-the-art for planetary and lunar ephemerides . . . . . . . . . . 45

    3.2   Reference frame theory in general relativity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47

          3.2.1    general relativity Barycentric Metric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48

          3.2.2    Time-scales in the solar system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50

          3.2.3    Inertial Frame . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52

          3.2.4    Definition of the solar system barycenter (SSB)     . . . . . . . 52

    3.3   The dynamical model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54

          3.3.1    Point-mass interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                   CONTENTS          3

          3.3.2   Asteroid perturbations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55

          3.3.3   Lense-Thirring acceleration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57

          3.3.4   Shape of the Sun . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58

    3.4   Planetary Datasets   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61

          3.4.1   Time delay of the propagation of light . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62

          3.4.2   Radio science and navigation data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64

          3.4.3   Angular ground-based observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66

    3.5   Fitting procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67


4   Tests of alternative theoretical frameworks with planetary ephemeris            69

    4.1   Parametrized post-Newtonian framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71

          4.1.1   Equations of motion, Lense-Thirring and Shapiro delay . . . 74

          4.1.2   Time-scales . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77

          4.1.3   Constraints and correlations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77

          4.1.4   The extended PPN formalism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81

    4.2   Equivalence principle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85

          4.2.1   The case of metric theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87

          4.2.2   The case of non-metric theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89

          4.2.3   The equivalence principle in a planet-satellite system . . . . . 90

          4.2.4   The equivalence principle at planetary scale . . . . . . . . . . 91

          4.2.5   Comment on the mass in the Shapiro delay equation . . . . . 92

          4.2.6   The issue of time in non-metric theories . . . . . . . . . . . . 93

    4.3   Variation of the gravitational constant G . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94

    4.4   Massive gravity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98

    4.5   Yukawa potential and Fifth Force . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103

    4.6   Einstein-dilaton theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104

          4.6.1   Equations of motion and Shapiro delay . . . . . . . . . . . . 106

          4.6.2   Conserved quantities and the definition of the SSB . . . . . . 108
                         Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


4     CONTENTS

          4.6.3   Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109

    4.7   MOND . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110


5   Inconsistent tests with ephemeris outputs                                        112

    5.1   Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113

    5.2   The case of the advance of the perihelia and nodes . . . . . . . . . . 114

    5.3   What can often be found in the literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117

    5.4   Why consistency matters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119


6   Future directions                                                                122

    6.1   Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122

    6.2   Observation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124


7   Summary                                                                          125


A Derivation of the Shapiro delay at the c−4 level, and related issues               156



1 Introduction

The current definition of what is an ephemeris is a table giving the future posi-

tions of a planet, comet, or satellite. By extension, it also includes the dynamical

framework from which the planetary positions and velocities are estimated. This

framework includes not only the dynamical modeling and the reference system with

which the motion is described, but also the sample of observations used for adjusting

the constants of the model. In this review, we will mainly focused on ephemerides of

planets, but there are also ephemerides of natural and artificial satellites, small bodies

(comets, asteroids) and pulsars.

    With the XIXth century and the golden age of the big refractors (Verdet, 1990),

the astrometry of planets has known a significant improvement, leading to an

increased accuracy of the dynamical theories describing their motions. Together with
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                   CONTENTS           5

these improvements, came the inconsistencies between very accurate observed posi-

tions of planets, such as Uranus, and the classical Newtonian modeling of gravity.

In the case of Uranus, a significant—even at this epoch—difference of several sec-

onds of arc between its observed positions and the positions proposed by the models,

based on Newton’s laws, opens the door to a major controversy of the century. Why

the Uranus orbit does not match with the observations when, for instances, comet

ephemerides are able to predict accurately their return in the visible sky ? Since 1821,

the explanation of an unknown planet perturbing the orbit of Uranus has been pro-

posed. A hunt for the unseen planet started with an intensification in 1844 and the

hidden celestial object, called Neptune, was finally discovered in 1846 by Galle in

Berlin at the location that was predicted by Le Verrier and Addams. This episode

signs the paramount of classical celestial mechanics of the XIXth century. However,

an other problem remains : the orbit of Mercury. At the beginning of the XXth cen-

tury, catalogs of planetary observations have been built with a worldwide effort and

provided angular positions for almost one century with accuracies below the level of

few seconds of arc. During this period, when no direct measure of the planetary dis-

tance was possible, the constraints on the size of the planetary orbits were obtained

thanks to the long interval of observations and precise determination of the mean

motions, and consequently, with the third Kepler law, of the semi-major axis.

   In the case of Mercury, the observed variation of the Mercury orbit was far too

important to be left unexplained in comparison to the observational accuracy of the

end of the XIX century and the beginning of the XXth century. Following the exam-

ple of Neptune and Uranus, people proposed the existence of another hidden object,

called Vulcain, perturbing the orbit of Mercury the same way that Neptune perturbs

the one of Uranus. The problem was that no one was able to observe Vulcain. Some

proposed that the planet could be always located on the other side of the sun relative
                         Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


6     CONTENTS

to the earth, making it impossible to be seen from earth. Others proposed a mod-

ification of Newton’s potential equation. However, it was Einstein who ultimately

explained Mercury orbit, positing that gravity was not a force, but a result of the

spacetime curvature caused by the mass of celestial bodies (Einstein, 1915).

    Decades later, thanks to the remote exploration of the solar system, planetary

ephemerides have evolved with high accurate astrometric observations obtained for

planet and natural satellites thanks to the navigation tracking of spacecraft (s/c) orbit-

ing these systems. Table 1 gives a good comparison between three generations of

planetary ephemerides developed at key stages of their evolution: from the end of the

classical Newtonian celestial mechanics (Gaillot and Le Verrier, 1913), to the begin-

ning of the space regular exploration (Standish, 1983) and up to the present time

(Park et al., 2021; Fienga et al., 2019a).

    Since the beginning of the space exploration, general relativity has been con-

tinuously tested with planetary orbits, for instance, using the first direct radar

measurements on the telluric planet surfaces (Shapiro, 1964). These measurements

were the first direct estimations of the Earth-Venus, Mercury or Mars distances used

as direct constraints in the construction of planetary ephemerides (Ash et al., 1967;

Standish et al., 1976). With the Apollo and Lunakhod missions on the Moon and

the installation of light reflecting corner cubes, a new step is reached as centimet-

ric measures of the Earth-Moon distances are obtained with Lunar Laser Ranging

(LLR) since then, with regular improvement of the measurement accuracy (Murphy

et al., 2008; Turyshev et al., 2013b; Courde et al., 2017). In 1983, the first tracking

data from the Viking landers on Mars have been included in the numerical integra-

tion of the Mars orbit at JPL (Newhall et al., 1983). With these measurements and

those of the first Pioneer and Voyager flybys of the Jovian and Saturnian systems,

the accuracy of the planetary ephemerides enters into the age of kilometer accura-

cies for the planets and few tens of centimeter for the Moon thanks to LLR. At this
                          Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                       CONTENTS            7

level of accuracy, the modelisation of the planetary dynamics was upgraded including

asteroid perturbations of the 5 biggest objects, Mars rotation improvement but also

figure-figure effect for the modelling of the Earth-Moon tidal deformations (Stan-

dish, 2001). Since 2010, the s/c tracking measurements are still improving thanks to

the installation of more efficient transpondeurs. It is now possible to study the orbit

of Mars with an accuracy of less than a meter and since 2016 to have a monitoring of

Jupiter and Saturn orbits with an accuracy of tens of meters.

    With these accuracies, the complexity of the dynamical model increases and it

is clear that the solar system becomes a more and more interesting tool for testing

general relativity or alternative theories of gravity. First tests of general relativity

with modern planetary ephemerides start in 1978 (Anderson et al., 1978) with regular

improvements since then.

    In this review, we will focus on planetary ephemerides, setting aside the topic

of gravity tests using the Earth-Moon system due to its complexity. Our incomplete

understanding of the Moon internal structure significantly limits, indeed, the testing

of alternative theories. But in order to introduce these limitations, a detailed presen-

tation of the complex mechanisms between the internal structure of the Moon, its

deformations, general relativity and their impacts on LLR observations (at very close

frequencies) has to be done, and we think that it is out of the scope of the present

work.

    Here, we first explain how a planetary ephemeris is built from its native relativis-

tic framework. We give the dynamical model and the data sets used for its fits as well

as the problematics related to the fit itself. We try, at this stage, to give an introduction

to some of the concepts hidden behind the construction of planetary ephemerides.

We then review classic results obtained in the general relativity and post-Newtonian

limits for the modern period. In a third part, we discuss state-of-the-art approaches

for directly confronting alternative theories of gravity with planetary observations in
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


8     CONTENTS

the most consistent possible way. Finally we give a quick overview of other types of

tests, deduced by interpreting planetary ephemeris accuracy at the light of different

gravitational frameworks. We will try to convince the readers that such results have

to be considered with a lot of caution because of the lack of consistency between the

framework with which the planetary ephemeris is built and the one proposed by the

authors.

    Finally, we acknowledge that this review may have limitations. We apologize in

advance for any inadvertent omissions in the references and welcome feedback from

our readers.


2 Basic concepts behind planetary ephemerides

2.1 Prerequisites: A Brief Primer on general relativity

In classical Newtonian mechanics, space and time are treated as absolute concepts.

For instance, the time span is assumed to be uniform throughout the universe. But the

main lesson from general relativity is that not only space and time are relative notions

rather than absolute ones, but also that the structure formed by space and time is

curved by the energy of matter. This notably means that the very notion of distances

in space and time depends on the observer, and also that observation may be impacted

by the curvature of spacetime. This implies a wide range of subtleties when one

describes motions at a level at which Newton’s theory is no longer accurate enough.

In what follows, we provide a brief summary of what is required to understand those

subtleties.


2.1.1 Newton’s theory

According to the first law of motion in Newton’s theory, an inertial motion is an

uniform motion in a straight line. As a consequence, free fall motions are not inertial

in Newton’s theory, but are accelerated by the gravitational force F . This force acts
                                  Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                                          CONTENTS                   9

between every massive objects and reads


                                                           GMA MB rAB
                                  FAB = −FBA =               2          ,                                       (1)
                                                            rAB  ∥rAB ∥


where M is the equivalent to the charge in Coulomb’s law, but for gravity and G the

constant of gravitation.1 M is usually named gravitational mass, since it is related to

the gravitational force. According to the second law of motion, the acceleration that

follows from this force is

                                                mA aA = FAB ,                                                   (2)

where mA is the inertial mass of the body A. Namely, to accelerate a body A with

acceleration aA , a force FAB needs to be applied, regardless of the type of force in

question—it could be gravitational or electrostatic etc. Just as one would not expect

a relationship between the charge q in the electrostatic force and the inertial mass,

one should not anticipate a relationship between the gravitational “charge” M and

the inertial mass m. However, observations indicate otherwise, compelling Newton

to postulate the equivalence of gravitational and inertial mass. This is known as the

equivalence principle.

       A common way to derive the equation of motion in classical mechanics is through

the definition of a Lagrangian of motion—of the general form L = K − V , where

K is the kinetic energy and V the potential energy. The Lagrangian of motion in the

theory of Newton reads
                                                       mv 2
                                              LN =          + mU,                                               (3)
                                                        2
where v is the velocity of the moving object and U is the Newtonian potential that

satisfies the Poisson equation


                                               ∆U = −4πGρm ,                                                    (4)

  1                                                                           2
      Indeed, Coulomb’s law between two charges reads |F12 | = kC |q1 ||q2 |/r12 , where kC is Coulomb’s constant.
                                 Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


10        CONTENTS

where ρm is the mass density of the gravitational sources.2 For instance, for a sum of

spherical bodies A,
                                                      X             GmA
                                      U (xi , t) =                            ,                                   (5)
                                                                |x − xiA (t)|
                                                                  i
                                                        A

is solution of Eq. (4),with xi and xiA (t) the positions of the moving object and of the

gravitational sources A, respectively, where

                                                        Z
                                              mA =              ρm d3 r.                                          (6)
                                                            A



Indeed, applying the Euler-Lagrange equation


                                              ∂L   d ∂L
                                                 −      = 0,                                                      (7)
                                              ∂x dt ∂v


on LN leads to Newton’s equation of motion


                                                    a = ∇U,                                                       (8)


which reproduces Eq. (2) with Eq. (1) for M = m. In the Newtonian framework, the

speed of light, c, and the constant of gravitation, G, are constants. Time and space

are universal and space is flat.




2.1.2 Proper time in special relativity

At the onset of the XXth century, a group of physicists understood that time and

space were not separate concepts, but instead, composed a singular entity known as

spacetime. In this new understanding, time and space became relative notions, and



  2
    Note that the potential energy with this definition of the gravitational potential indeed reads V = −mU , such that
one indeed verifies that LN = K − V in Eq. (3).
                                  Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                                              CONTENTS                   11

the structure of spacetime, according to Minkowski, possessed a Lorentzian nature—

which means that the variation of the proper time of an observer follows


                       c2 dτ 2 = −ηαβ dxα dxβ = c2 dt2 − dx2 − dy 2 − dz 2 ,                                            (9)


 where ηαβ is named the Minkowski metric, and {t, x} inertial and non-rotating

coordinate systems.3 Throughout the text, we use the metric signature (-,+,+,+)

and Einstein’s summation notational convention—which is such that Aσ B σ :=
         σ
P
  σ Aσ B . The variable c will be identified in Sec. 2.1.9 as the speed of light,

but more fundamentaly, it fixes the causal structure of the flat spacetime equation

Eq. (9). Lorentz transformations of special relativity are simply the coordinate

transformations that leave the structure of the metric Eq. (9) unchanged. They read

                            v · x                     v(v · r)
                    T = γ t − 2 , X = x + γvt + (γ − 1)          ,                                                    (10)
                              c                           v2


where v 2 = v · v and where v is the velocity between the two inertial reference

frames, and with the Lorentz factor γ defined as


                                                                 1
                                                  γ := q                   ,                                          (11)
                                                                       2
                                                              1 − vc2


Contrary to popular wisdom, it is Eq. (9)—not the Lorentz transformations equation

Eq. (10)—that is needed to derive the difference in time elapsed between two twins

in Langevin’s twin paradox.4 Let us assume a pair of observers that are at the same

location at the spacetime events A and B , but one of the observer stays at rest while


  3
    Non-rotating with respect to what will be the subject of a discussion in Sec. 2.1.4.
  4
    Langevin’s twin paradox presents a scenario in which one twin travels to space at a high speed and returns to find
the other twin has aged more. This highlights the relativistic effect of time dilation, as described in the theory of special
relativity. The paradox’s essence is rooted in a perceived contradiction: both twins should ostensibly observe the other
with a similar relative motion, which would therefore result in the same ‘anomalous’ aging effect for both when solely
using Lorentz’s transformations Eqs. (10) in the derivation.
                             Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


12       CONTENTS




Fig. 1 Schematic illustration of the trajectories (world-lines) of two observers, one at rest and the other
accelerated. The accelerated trajectory correspond to the curve CAB .




the other accelerates to leave and return to the other observer (see Fig. 1). In terms of

the reference frame of the observer at rest {τ r , x}, the accelerated observer’s proper

time τ a between the two events A and B reads

                                                             r
                                                                      v2 r
                                    Z                Z
                           a                   a
                          τAB =             dτ =                1−       dτ ,                        (12)
                                      CAB              CAB            c2


according to Eq. (9), with v = dx/dτ r , and where CAB is the accelerated trajectory

of the accelerated observer in the reference frame of the observer at rest. Given a

trajectory CAB , one can derive the proper time of the accelerated observer elapsed

between the events A and B . It is worth noting that Eq. (12) would not maintain the

same form if one attempts to derive the proper time elapsed for the rest observer from

the coordinates of the accelerated observer. This is because the Minkowski metric

(Eq. 9) does not remain invariant for an accelerated reference frame {τ a , X}. In the

proper reference frame of an accelerated (but non-rotating) observer, the metric Eq.
                               Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                              CONTENTS        13

(9) would instead read (Ni and Zimmermann, 1978)

                                         2
               2   2              a·X
             c dτ =            1+              c2 (dτ a )2 − dX 2 − dY 2 − dZ 2 ,            (13)
                                   c2


where a is the acceleration of the proper reference frame of an accelerated observer.

This fact alone dispels any paradox, as the situations of the two observers are distinct

both physically and mathematically. From Eq. (12), one can infer that the elapsed

proper time of an observer who has been accelerated between two arbitrary spacetime

events A and B is always smaller than the elapsed proper time of an observer at rest
 a     r
τAB < τAB . In other words, this means that for an inertial observer the following

action

                                              Z r
                                                       v2
                           Z                                        Z
          S = −mc      2
                               dτ = −mc   2
                                                    1 − 2 dt =          LSR (xα , v α )dt,   (14)
                                                       c


is maximal, where LSR is, therefore, the Lagrangian of motion of special relativity:

                                                        r
                                                    2        v2
                                    LSR = −mc           1−      .                            (15)
                                                             c2


2.1.3 Free fall and proper time in general relativity

In general relativity, the free fall of a point mass m aslo maximizes the proper time

τ , but which is now defined by

                                         Z      q
                                 τAB =              −gαβ dxα dxβ ,                           (16)
                                          CAB
                                 Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


14        CONTENTS

where CAB means that the integration is taken along a given path between the space-

time positions5 A and B of the observer. 6 In cartesian coordinates for instance, one

has xi = (x, y, z). gαβ is the spacetime metric, which depends on the position, and

which represents the curvature of spacetime. As we will see below, the metric is

solution of the Einstein-Hilbert equation of general relativity.

      The definition of the proper time for an observer in Eq. (16) is true whether or not

the motion of the observer is accelerated. It is important to keep in mind that unlike in

Newton’s theory, a free falling observer in general relativity has an inertial motion—

that is, it is not accelerated. In general relativity, inertial bodies follow geodesics of

spacetime that correspond to free fall trajectories. This is forced upon the theory by

the equivalence principle, which states that the inertial mass is indeed equivalent to

the gravitational mass.

      But since the free fall of an observer maximizes its proper time, it means that

Eq. (16) has to be an extremum in the case of a free fall motion. It means that the

path CAB between the events A and B must be such that it extremizes Eq. (16). As

a consequence, it must follow the Least Action Principle7 of Lagrangian mechanics

that demandes the extremization of an action defined upon a Lagrangian. Indeed,

from Eq. (16), one can define the following action

                                                           Z
                                                  2
                                      S = mc τ =               L(xα , v α )dt,                                     (17)




  5
     Also named “events”
  6
     Let us note that we use the mostly plus convention P for the signature of the metric (− + ++), and that we use the
Einstein summation convention, such that Xσ Y σ :=          3
                                                            σ=0 Xσ Y . x
                                                                        σ    α
                                                                                = (ct, xi ) = (ct, ⃗  x) = (ct, x), where
i = 1, 2, 3.
   7
     The Least Action Principle might be more appropriately termed the Extremum Action Principle, since it primarily
requires that the variation of the action remains null: δS = 0. This implies that the action is at an extremum.
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                     CONTENTS     15

where v α = c dxα /dx0 = dxα /dt is a velocity expressed in terms of the coordinates

{xα } and where the Lagrangian reads

                                        q
                            L = mc2      −gαβ (xσ )v α v β .                    (18)


The Least Action Principle demands that δS = 0. Given a specific spacetime metric

gαβ , one can therefore compute the equations of motion by applying the Euler-

Lagrange equation on Eq. (18). The equation can also be applied on the formal

definition of equation Eq. (18) and one then gets the general form—that is, for all

spacetime metrics—of the equations of motion (for massive point particles) that reads

                                                   α
                          d2 xα
                                                      
                                             0 v
                                =     Γα
                                       σϵ − Γσϵ            vσ vϵ ,              (19)
                           dt2                    c


where
                               1 γσ
                     Γγαβ :=     g (∂α gσβ − ∂β gασ − ∂σ gαβ ),                 (20)
                               2
is named the Christoffel connection with g γσ , the contravariant metric—which is

such that gασ g σβ = δαβ , where δ is the Kronecker symbol. Besides, an accelerated

trajectory would read

                                           α
                        d2 xα
                                            
                                 α     0 v
                              − Γσϵ − Γσϵ      vσ vϵ = F α ,                    (21)
                         dt2              c


where F α is the force responsible for the acceleration.
                       Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


16     CONTENTS

2.1.4 Einstein-Hilbert equation and the Newtonian approximation

The spacetime metric is curved by the energy of matter according to the Einstein-

Hilbert equation that reads


                                   1       8πG
                              Rαβ − gαβ R = 4 Tαβ ,                             (22)
                                   2        c


where Rαβ is the Ricci tensor (see sec 2.1.5) defined as


                  Rαβ = ∂µ Γµαβ − ∂β Γµαµ + Γµσµ Γσαβ − Γµσβ Γσαµ ,             (23)


and

                                      R = g σϵ Rσϵ                              (24)

is the Ricci scalar, and Tαβ is the stress-energy tensor of the material fields—which

we will define in Sec. 2.1.6. The stress-energy tensor represents the energy content

of the matter fields that generate the curvature of spacetime. Otherwise, we will see

below that G corresponds to the constant of Newton, also known as the gravitational

constant.




The Newtonian approximation

In the Newtonian formalism given in Sec. 2.1.1, we assume that the speed of the

considered bodies is small with respect to the speed of light v 2 /c2 ≪ 1. Let us add

the constant −mc2 to this Lagrangian, which does not impact the equation of motion,

but which is such that one reproduces the Lagrangian of motion of special relativity

equation Eq. (15) at leading order when U = 0, that is

                              r
                                                 v2
                                                       4
                         2           v2      2           v
            LSR = −mc             1 − 2 = −mc 1 − 2 + O      .                  (25)
                                     c           2c      c4
                                    Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                                     CONTENTS     17

Now, the Lagrangian of motion for the theory of Newton reads


                                                             v2
                                                                           
                                                      2          U
                                       LN = −mc            1− 2 − 2             .                (26)
                                                             2c  c


Let us stress that for an orbit, one has v 2 /c2 ∼ U/c2 ≪ 1 in the theory of Newton.

This approximation ought to remain valid at leading order in general relativity in the

weak field limit. As a consequence, for now on, we will use the notation O(c−2n )

to refer to both O(v 2n /c2n ) and O(U n /c2n ). Since the theory of Newton is already

accurate in the solar system, we expect the theory of general relativity to reproduce

the trajectories of the Newtonian theory at leading order. Therefore, one expects that

there exists a spacetime metric that reproduces the Lagrangian equation Eq. (26) at

leading order. One can check that injecting the following metric in Eq. (18)

                                                             
                                      2U
                        2    2         2
                    −c dτ = ds = − 1 − 2                          c2 dt2 + dx2 + dy 2 + dz 2 ,   (27)
                                       c


where ds is the spacetime line element defined as ds2 = gαβ dxα dxβ , gives back the

Lagrangian of motion of the theory of Newton equation Eq. (26), up to corrections of

order O(c−4 ). Therefore, one expects the metric in Eq. (27) to be solution of general

relativity at leading order for the kind of weakly gravitating sources that we have in

the solar system.8 It can be indeed verified that by injecting the metric Eq. (27) in the

Einstein-Hilbert equation Eq. (23), the resulting differential equation reads


                                           ∆U = −4πGρm + O(c−2 ),                                (28)


where ρm is the mass density of the gravitational sources defined as ρm = T 00 /c2 +

O(c−2 ). It corresponds to Newton’s universal law of gravitation as long as G is


  8
      As opposed to a neutron star or a black-hole.
                                    Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


18          CONTENTS

indeed the gravitational constant. One has therefore identified G in Eq. (22) to New-

ton’s constant from the weak-field and slowly moving limit of the theory that leads

to the same field equation as Newton’s theory at leading order.

       Therefore, general relativity produces the same trajectories at leading order as

Newton’s theory. This is called the Newtonian approximation of general relativity.

       However, let us stress that even at this level of approximation, the two theories dif-

fer drastically—in a way that can be tested at the experimental level already. Indeed,

in general relativity, the variation of an observer proper time dτ (Eq. 27) with respect

to the proper time of another observer depends explicitly on their different positions

in a gravitational potential U . This means that two observers at different locations

in the gravitational potential will not agree on the evolution of time. This effect,

although minute, can be tested if one has accurate enough clocks. In other words, had

we developed atomic clocks with sufficient precision prior to our ability to observe

the motions of celestial bodies in the solar system, we could have confirmed the

superiority of general relativity over Newton’s theory. This could have been achieved

by comparing the frequencies of two clocks located at different positions relative

to the geoid. However, due to our atmosphere’s transparency, astronomers identi-

fied the limitations of Newton’s theory through the anomalous advance of Mercury’s

perihelion—see Table 1 for the numerical value of this advance—before quantum

physicists could create sufficiently accurate atomic clocks. We will further discuss

the advance of the perihelion of Mercury in Sec. 2.1.8.

       Finally, one can see in Eq. (27) that space it flat9 at leading order, such that free

fall trajectories in the solar system are essentially the consequence of the curvature

of the temporal dimension, not the spatial one.




  9
      Space is Euclidean in Eq. (27), such that it satisfies the Pythagorean theorem.
                                  Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                                          CONTENTS    19

Gauge invariance of Newton’s equation and the definition of coordinate times

Newton’s equation Eq. (28) is notably invariant under the following change of the

potential:

                                         U → U + ak (t)xk + b(t),                                    (29)

where ak (t) and b(t) are arbitrary three-vector and scalar that depend on time. 10 One

often says that the Eq. (28) is invariant under the change of gauge defined by Eq. (29).

       The change of gauge in Eq. (29) corresponds to a change of the coordinate time

being used to describe a motion. This is a major difference with respect to Newton’s

theory where there is a unique time. A coordinate time is simply a mathematical

construction of a time that can be related to the proper time of an observer, but not

necessarily. For instance, it can simply be defined according to purely mathematical

criteria, such as the simplicity of the field equations.

       In order to illustrate the dependence of the Newtonian potential to the coordinate

time being used, let us define a coordinate time that would correspond to the proper

time of an imaginary observer that is so remote from the barycenter of the solar

system that it can be at rest with respect to the solar system because the potential of

the solar system and its gradient at their location is negligible. Assuming that this

imaginary observer is indeed at rest with respect to the solar system, this means that

the coordinate time t corresponds to the (fictional) proper time τ such that dt = dτ

at the location of this (fictional) observer. The Newtonian potential in this gauge—or,

equivalently, with this coordinate time—reads


                                                      X         GmA
                                       U (xi , t) =                       ,                          (30)
                                                            |x − xiA (t)|
                                                              i
                                                        A



where mA and xiA (t) are the masses and the positions of the bodies A. Alternatively,

one could define a coordinate time that corresponds to a (fictional) observer that

  10
       Adding any term δU that is such that ∆δU = 0 leaves Newton’s equation invariant.
                          Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


20      CONTENTS

would be at rest at the center of the coordinate system xi = 0. In this gauge, the

Newtonian potential would instead read

                                    "                                        #
                 i
                          X                  1             1      xj xjA (t)
            U (x , t) =       GmA                     −         −              ,            (31)
                                        |xi − xiA (t)| |xiA (t)| |xiA (t)|3
                          A



because having dt = dτ in Eq. (27) at the center imposes U (xi = 0) = 0, and being

at rest imposes ⃗
                ∇U |xi =0 = 0. The transformation from the potential expressed in the

coordinate time of a remote observer to the potential expressed in the coordinate time

of an observer at the center of the coordinate system takes the form of Eq. (29) with


                      X           xkA (t)                               X GmA
         ak (t) = −       GmA               3    , and       b(t) = −                   .   (32)
                                |xiA (t)|                                   |xiA (t)|
                      A                                                 A



This notably means that the leading order of the equation of general relativity is

invariant under specific changes of time coordinate. As we will see in Sec. 2.1.5, this

is a leftover of the invariance of general relativity through a change of coordinate sys-

tem. It is really important to notice that while the field equation Eq. (28) is invariant

under some changes of the coordinate time, the actual solution of the potential is not,

as one can check from Eqs. (30) and (31).

     In the coordinate time defined as the proper time of the fictional remote observer

t = τr , the proper time of fictional observer at the center of the coordinate system τo

reads
                                                Z X
                                          1            GmA
                              τo = t −                          dt,                         (33)
                                         2c2          |xiA (t)|
                                                  A
provided that they are indeed at rest with one another. See Sec. 3.2.2 for a discus-

sion on the coordinate times that are used by the community, following the IAU

recommendations (Soffel, 2003).
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                  CONTENTS           21

Dependence of a coordinate time to the trajectories of the gravitational bodies

Eq. (33) teaches us something very important. Depending on its definition, a coordi-

nate time can depend explicitly on the trajectories of the gravitational bodies xA (t).

As a consequence, in order to define such a coordinate time in practice, it is necessary

to estimate the positions of the celestial bodies over time with enough accuracy.

   But why would one want to define such a coordinate time if it means that one

must already have an accurate knowledge of the trajectories of the gravitational

bodies in order to define it? Simply because one has to define such a coordinate

time in order to compare different observations made at various locations by several

observers. The proper time of each observer is indeed different and the differences

between the various proper times depend on the observers’ relative trajectories in the

gravitational potential. Therefore, in order to compare the various observations, one

first has to define a coordinate time that will be used to transform the proper time

of every observer to this coordinate time, such that after the transformation, all the

observations are expressed in a common time. We will see in Sec. 2.1.7 that at the

post-Newtonian level—or, the next-to-leading order—similar considerations must be

taken into account for the definition of space.

   Any definition of a coordinate time could be used in theory. However, in practice,

a coordinate time is usually defined as being the proper time of a fictional observer at

some convenient location in the solar system, such as at its barycenter or at the geoid

of the Earth. Such coordinate times are defined by the International Astronomical

Union, as we will further discuss in Sec. 3.2.2.

   But since one needs to know the trajectories of the gravitational bodies in the

solar system in order to construct this coordinate time, it means that one needs to use

planetary ephemerides to construct such a time. Therefore, planetary ephemerides

actually deliver the coordinate times defined by the International Astronomical Union

to the community, as discussed more in details in Sec. 3.2.2.
                                     Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


22           CONTENTS

Rotating reference frames

The Newtonian approximation of the spacetime metric in general relativity assumes

the form of Eq. (27) only within a specific category of coordinate systems, typically

referred to as inertial frames. Notably, the coordinate system must be kinematically

non-rotating relative to distant celestial objects such as quasars. This suggests that

the rotation (or absence thereof) of a local reference frame must be defined in relation

to exceedingly distant objects. In support of his theory, Newton posited this coinci-

dence as evidence of an absolute space, serving as the stage for dynamic events and

providing a reference for defining rotation. In contrast, figures such as Leibniz and

later Mach, contended that this apparent coincidence reveals that inertia is relative,

depending more on the universe matter content than on an absolute space. Heavily

influenced by these perspectives, Einstein proposed the principle of inertia relativity,

later referred to as Mach’s principle (Einstein, 1918). This principle stipulates that

spacetime is wholly determined by its matter content. Considering general relativity

accommodates vacuum solutions, whether Einstein’s theory satisfies the principle of

inertia relativity remains debated (Barbour and Pfister, 1995). However, practically

speaking, the solar system asymptotic metric must be integrated into the larger space-

time metric effectively generated by distant sources. This requirement accounts for

why inertial reference frames are non-rotating relative to very remote sources in gen-

eral relativity—assuming they can be approximated as stationary due to their minimal

angular velocity in the sky over certain timescales.


2.1.5 Invariance of the laws through a change of coordinate system

Tensors

The tensorial nature of the Einstein-Hilbert equation Eq. (22) enforces the covariance

principle,11 which demands that the laws of Nature do not depend on the choice of

  11
       Or, principle of relativity (Einstein, 1918).
                          Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                       CONTENTS       23

the coordinate system. Indeed, tensorial equations—such as Eq. (22)—are invariant

under change of coordinates. A tensor is defined by the way it transforms under a

change of coordinates. A tensor W , with n contravariant indices and m covariant

indices transform as

                                                           
                                    Y Y ∂xαk ∂X νk
               Wβα11...β
                     ...αn
                           {xσ } =                          Wνµ1...ν
                                                                   ...µn
                                                                         {X σ }.    (34)
                        m
                                       αk βk
                                               ∂X µk ∂xβk         1   m



Tensorial equations are manifestly invariant under coordinate change, that is:


                                                 ω ω ...ω σ           ω ω ...ωσ
 Aσα11σα22...σ    σ     σ1 σ2 ...σp   σ      1 2      p          1 2      p
          ...αn {x } = Bα1 α2 ...αn {x } ⇔ Aβ1 β2 ...βn {X } = Bβ1 β2 ...βn {X }. (35)
              p




Because the metric field is a tensor, one can notably verify with Eq. (34) that the

line-element


               ds2 = −c2 dτ 2 = gαβ {xσ }dxα dxβ = gαβ {X σ }dX α dX β              (36)


is invariant under coordinate change. Indeed, the proper time of an observer cannot

depend on any coordinate system as it is a measured quantity. Let us note however,

that according to this definition, the Christoffel connection defined in Eq. (20) is not

a tensor as it transforms as follow:


                         ∂xα ∂X σ ∂X ρ β            ∂ 2 xα ∂X σ ∂X ρ
          Γα    σ
           µν {x } =       β   µ    ν
                                      Γσρ {X σ } −                   .              (37)
                         ∂X ∂x ∂x                  ∂X σ ∂X ρ ∂xµ ∂xν


One can also check that the difference between two connections is a tensor. What the

covariance principle means in particular is that the laws of physics are independent

with respect to the observer, whether the observer is inertial or not. While this is very

satisfying at the fundamental level, it also implies an intrinsic ambiguity about the

coordinates that one can use, as they are all equivalent in principle.
                         Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


24      CONTENTS

Observables

Certain coordinate systems can result in what are known as spurious effects. These

are essentially false effects arising solely from the coordinate system and do not

reflect reality. Determining whether an effect is genuine or spurious can be challeng-

ing unless all calculations are made with respect to actual observables. Parameters

referred to as observables are independent of the coordinate system, and therefore,

can correspond to quantities that an observer can directly measure. These include val-

ues such as the proper time elapsed for an observer between two events, or, as we will

discuss shortly, the angle between two light cones at the observer’s location. On the

contrary, it is very important to keep in mind that positions, trajectories, or velocities,

are not observables, but have to be reconstructed from observations after assuming a

specific coordinate system—as well, as we will see, as a model for the dynamics of

bodies and light.


Observables Are Scalar Quantitites.      According to Eq. (34), the only type of tensors

that do not depend on the coordinate system are scalars, which are such that


                                   S{xσ } = S{X σ }.                                  (38)


Tensors, if not scalars, therefore cannot represent observable quantities.


Positions in two dimensions: Projection on the Celestial Sphere. From an

observer’s perspective, the only tangible element related to the spatial distribution of

any distant object is the relative angular separation in the sky between the images of

two objects. This measurement can be made without reference to any specific coor-

dinate system. This angular separation corresponds to angles between the light cones

connecting the distant objects to the observer at the observer’s location, as shown in

Figure 2.
                         Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                    CONTENTS           25

    However, observers typically project at their location the vector of the light cones,

which join the distant objects to the observer’s location, onto a coordinate-dependent

representation of their celestial spheres. This process is where coordinate systems

become to be used. Importantly, it must be noted that the relative position (angle)

of the same distant objects as viewed by two different observers can vary. This is

because in general relativity, both time and space are relative to the observer and to

its gravitational environment. Hence, there is no such thing as absolute positions. In

simpler terms, the celestial spheres for different observers differ in general. Although

this effect is minute for observers in the solar system, it nonetheless needs to be

accounted for in modern astrometry.

    In practical terms, an object location on the celestial sphere is determined by

observing the angular separation in the sky between the object and reference points

like quasars, from the perspective of the observer. Indeed, due to their extremely

remote location, the apparent movement of these reference points is negligible at the

present level of accuracy for the astrometric measurements for these objects (see Sec.

3.2.3), and they can therefore indeed serve as static reference points (or astrometric

candle light).

    However, there is another significant effect to consider, which is also illustrated in

Fig. 2: the propagation of light is not generally linear. This means that if an observer

sees a remote object at a particular location on his celestial sphere, it doesn’t imply

that the object is actually at that position on the sphere. This effect is referred to as

gravitational lensing (or deflection of light in the solar system) and is due to the fact

that light propagates on null-geodesics, see Sec. 2.1.9—which are not straight lines

in general. Although its impact is relatively weak for objects within the solar system,

it highlights the inherent difficulty of attributing positions on the celestial sphere in

general relativity.
                            Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


26       CONTENTS




Fig. 2 Schematic illustration of the angle (α) determined by an observer (O) at their location, between
two null-geodesics—see Sec. 2.1.9—that link the observer to two sources (Q and S) of electromagnetic
waves. Each null-geodesic represents a segment of the light-cone centered on an emitter.


     Hence, assigning a two-dimensional position to an object in general relativity not

only necessitates the definition of a coordinate system, but also requires a model of

the gravitational field through which light has propagated. Consequently, any posi-

tion in general relativity is model-dependent and is essentially a reconstruction from

observations.

The Third Dimension: Range. There are various methods to infer the distance

between a remote object and an observer. For s/c, the most accurate technique is

typically the measure of the time delay between the emission of a signal in the direc-

tion of the spacecraft and the reception of the returned signal by the probe (ranging).

Essentially, this involves measuring the round-trip time of an electromagnetic sig-

nal emitted at a given frequency between an observer and a spacecraft. Given that

the signal propagates at a constant speed in vacuum, this propagation time can be
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                  CONTENTS           27

converted into a distance. However, while the signal indeed travels at the speed of

light in a vacuum locally, its propagation time measured by a given observer can be

affected by the gravitational field localised between the source of emission and this

observer, along the trajectory of the electromagnetic signal. As a result, even when a

the signal follows a straight line between two points, the propagation time would not

correspond to the Euclidean distance between these points divided by the speed of

light. This effect is known as the Shapiro delay—See Sec. 2.1.9.

   Therefore, determining distances through ranging techniques not only depends

on the specific choice of the coordinate system considered but also depends on the

knowledge one has on the gravitational potential in the solar system. Consequently,

distances are both model and theory dependent. Indeed, the potential in the solar

system is reconstructed by solving the field equations of a given theory—e.g. Eq.

(27)—after assuming a specific model for the solar system that “sources” the field

equations—e.g. the right hand side of Eq. (27).

   Let us stress in particular that a modification of the field equations of general

relativity therefore implies the need for a new analysis of the measures, leading to a

new determination of the distances.


The Need of Conventions for Coordinate Systems. Because space and time are rel-

ative, for various observers to compare their respective observations and agree on the

positions of bodies, they must define a set of coordinates that allows to convert their

respective observations in terms of positions in space and time. This is the role of the

IAU recommendations that we will discuss in Sec. 3.2.


2.1.6 The action of general relativity

Just as the equations of motion can be derived from the Euler-Lagrange equation,

the field equation of general relativity can be derived from a Lagrangian density

that is defined based on the metric field and the various material fields. The key
                                  Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


28        CONTENTS

difference lies in the type of dynamical variables used in the Lagrangian: instead of

using position and velocity as dynamical variables, one considers the fields and their

derivatives as dynamical variables in the case of a Lagrangian density.12 One can

define the action of general relativity as follows


                                                    √
                                                Z                   
                                                              R
                                                              4
                                    SGR =               −gd x    + Lm ,                                             (39)
                                                              2κ


where g is the metric determinant, Lm the Lagrangian density of matter fields, and

κ = 8πG/c4 the coupling constant between matter and curvature. In order to derive

the Euler-Lagragian equation, R is treated as a functional constructed upon the metric

field and its derivative—see Eq. (24). Lm is then a functional constructed upon the

matter fields and their derivative. For instance, for an electromagnetic field one has


                                   1 ασ βϵ
                       Lm =           g g (∂α Aβ − ∂β Aα )(∂σ Aϵ − ∂ϵ Aσ )                                          (40)
                                  4µ0


where µ0 is the magnetic permeability of vacuum, and Aα is the electromagnetic

four-vector. Let us note that one has Aα = (ϕ/c, A) where ϕ is the scalar poten-

tial and A the vector potential of classical electromagnetism, form which one can

compute the electric and magnetic fields (Jackson, 1998).

     Defining a theory from its action rather than from its equations is convenient

because it allows one to be sure that the theory possesses conservation laws for the

considered theory, which derive from Noether’s theorem that states that every sym-

metry of a Lagrangian implies the existence of a conservation law (Noether, 1918;

Wald, 1984). Therefore, most modern theories are defined from an action, although

there are some exceptions—such as MOND, see Sec. 4.7.


   12                                                √
      Note that mathematicians typically refer to −gL as a density because L is a scalar and a scalar multiplied by
the square root of the determinant corresponds to a mathematical object referred to as a density of weight −1; however,
physicists typically refer to L as a density, as it carries the dimension of an energy density and is frequently associated
with the definitions of kinetic and potential energy densities.
                           Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                          CONTENTS    29

   Applying the principle of least action on the action (39), one recovers the

Einstein-Hilbert equation of general relativity Eq. (22), with

                                            √
                                        2 δ( −gLm )
                               Tαβ = − √            ,                                (41)
                                         −g  δg αβ


where δ stands for a variational derivative. It is worth noting that from Noether’s

theorem, the diffeomorphism invariance—that is, the invariance under change of

coordinates—of the matter Lagrangian Lm implies the (covariant) conservation of

the stress-energy tensor

                                       ∇σ T µσ = 0,                                  (42)

where ∇σ is the covariant derivative defined as followed for a tensor X with k

contravariant indices and l covariant indices:


               ∇σ Xνµ11...ν
                        ...µk
                           l
                              = ∂σ Xνµ11...ν
                                         ...µk
                                            l
                                                                                     (43)

                                  +Γµσλ1 Xνλ...µ  k
                                            1 ...νl
                                                    + ... + Γµσλk Xνµ11...ν
                                                                        ...λ
                                                                           l

                                          µ1 ...µk
                                  −Γλσν1 Xλ...ν l
                                                   − ... − Γλσνl Xνµ11...λ
                                                                       ...µk
                                                                             .



This is, of course, consistent with the geometrical fact that ∇σ Gµσ = 0, with Gµν =

Rµν − 1/2 g µν R, the Einstein tensor, where Rµν is the contravariant Ricci tensor

defined from the covariant Ricci tensor Rµν and the contravariant metric tensor g µν

as Rµν = g µα g νβ Rαβ .




2.1.7 The post-Newtonian approximation of general relativity and
       gauge invariance

First, let us recall that the metric of general relativity at the Newtonian level, for

a reference frame that is not kinematically rotating with respect to distant celestial
                                 Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


30        CONTENTS

bodies,13 reads


                                                        2U
                                      g00 = −1 +           + O(c−3 ),                                             (44)
                                                        c2
                                                         g0i = O(c−2 ),                                           (45)

                                                 gij = δij + O(c−1 ),                                             (46)


such that one indeed has

                                      
                                    2U
                         ds2 = − 1 − 2 c2 dt2 + dx2 + dy 2 + dz 2 ,                                               (47)
                                     c


at leading order. The truncation between leading and next-to-leading orders in Eqs.

(44-46) are made with respect to the equation of motion that derives from the

Lagrangian of motion Eq. (18). Indeed, the Lagrangian of motion with Eqs. (44-46)

reads
                                                      2    
                                                1     v
                                  L∝1+                   − U + O(c−3 ).                                           (48)
                                                c2     2
One can show that a set of coordinate systems exists in general relativity that are such

that, at next-to-leading order, the metric reads (Damour et al., 1991)


                                              2w 2w2
                                g00 = −1 +       − 4 + O(c−5 ),                                                   (49)
                                              c2     c
                                                       4wi
                                               g0i = − 3 O(c−4 ),                                                 (50)
                                                      c
                                                    2w
                                     gij = δij 1 + 2 + O(c−3 ),                                                   (51)
                                                    c




   13
      Beyond rotating coordinate systems, it’s noteworthy that one could also define and utilize coordinate systems with
shear, instead of pseudo-cartesian coordinate systems. However, such systems are rarely used because they would notably
complicate the calculations, and likely also hinder understanding.
                                 Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                                           CONTENTS                  31

where w and wi are gravitational potentials. This is the so-called post-Newtonian

metric of general relativity, in conformally cartesian coordinates.14 Assuming this

metric, the field equation of general relativity reduces to


                               3 2        4 2
                                               wj = −4πGσ + O c−3 ,
                                                                   
                      ∆w +     2
                                 ∂tt w + 2 ∂tj                                                                     (52)
                              c          c
                                      2      2
                                                w = −4πGσ i + O c−2 ,
                                                                   
                             ∆wi − ∂ij wj − ∂ti                                                                    (53)


where σ = c−2 (T 00 + T kk ) and σ i = c−1 T 0i , such that σ and σ i are zeroth

order quantities—because T µν = O(c2 , c, c0 ) in the weak-field and slowly moving

approximation.15


Post-Newtonian gauge invariance

One can check that the equations Eqs. (52-53) are invariant under the following

transformations


                                                        1
                                             w′ = w −      ∂t λ,                                                   (54)
                                                        c2
                                                         1
                                              wi′ = wi + ∂i λ,                                                     (55)
                                                         4


where λ is an arbitrary differential function. Indeed, while the form of the metric

in Eqs. (49-51) completely fixes the type of spatial coordinates being considered, it

leaves a freedom at the level of the time coordinate. This gauge invariance indeed

corresponds to a shift of the time variable


                                                δt = c−4 λ(xα ).                                                   (56)

   14
      The name conformally cartesian stems from the fact that one has g00 gij = −δij + O(c−4 )—that is, the space-
space component of metric gij multiplied by a conformal factor (here, the time-time component of the metric g00 ) is flat
up to c−4 corrections. It’s worth noting that such coordinate systems generally do not exist in general in theories other
than general relativity—at least when the metric considered still defines the proper time dτ 2 = −gαβ dxα dxβ and not
a conformal frame.
   15
      One can verify that with the stress energy tensor of dust, which reads T αβ = −ρm uα uβ , where ρm is the rest
mass density and uα = dxα /dτ , such that u0 ∼ c.
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


32     CONTENTS

After having imposed a non-kinematically-rotating frame with respect to distant

celestial objects (such as quasars), a central world-line and the use of conformally

cartesian coordinates, Eq. (56) is a remaining freedom of our coordinate system.




Harmonic gauge

The International Astronomical Union recommends (Soffel, 2003) the use of har-

monic coordinates that are such that


                               g αβ Γσαβ = O(c−5 , c−4 ).                           (57)


However, because of the use of conformally cartesian coordinates, the space compo-

nent of this condition g αβ Γiαβ = O(c−4 ) is already satisfied, and one is left with the

time component of this condition that, considering the metric Eqs. (49-51), reduces

to

                               ∂t w + ∂j wj = O(c−2 ).                              (58)

With this condition, Eqs. (52-53) reduce to


                           □m w = −4πGσ + O c−3 ,
                                                
                                                                                    (59)

                           △wi = −4πGσ i + O c−2 ,
                                                
                                                                                    (60)


where □m and △wi are respectively the d’Alembertian and Laplacian of the usual

flat Minkowski spacetime:



                                 □m = −c−2 ∂tt
                                            2
                                               + △,                                 (61)

                          2     2     2
where, for instance, △ = ∂xx + ∂yy + ∂zz in Cartesian coordinates.
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                     CONTENTS       33

2.1.8 The Einstein-Infeld-Hoffman-Droste-Lorentz equation of motion

Up to corrections that can be taken into account at a later stage, celestial bodies

in the solar system can be approximated as being non-rotating point particles. This

approximation has been explored for the first time by Lorentz and Droste (Lorentz

and Droste, 1917a,b)—translated in (Lorentz and Droste, 1937)—and re-derived later

by Einstein, Infeld and Hoffman (Einstein et al., 1938). The stress-energy tensor for

point particles is simply the stress-energy tensor of a dust fluid


                                   T µν = ρm uµ uν ,                              (62)


where uα = dxα /dτ is the proper four-velocity of the fluid. In terms of conserved

mass along the fluid geodesics dmA /dτ = 0, it reads


                              X mA u0 /c µ
                     T µν =      √      v v ν δ (3) (x − xA (t)),                 (63)
                                   −g A A
                               A



 where δ (3) is the 3-dimensional delta function, and v α = dxα /dt the coordi-

nate four-velocity of the fluid, such that uα = u0 v α /c. Eq. (63) used the fact that

uµ ∇σ T µσ = 0 —which follows from Eq. (42)—such that one has the usual New-

tonian conservation of the mass density ∂σ (ρ∗ v σ ) = ∂t ρ∗ + ∂i (ρ∗ v i ) = 0 for the
               √
density ρ∗ := −gρm u0 /c. Solving the Einstein-Hilbert equation Eq. (22) with

this approximation, and in the harmonic gauge Eq. (58), leads to the metric in Eqs.

(49-51) with


                                       1
                              w = w0 − 2 ∆ + O(c−4 ),                             (64)
                                      c
                                  X GmA
                               i
                              w =          v i + O(c−2 ),                         (65)
                                       rA A
                                     A
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


34      CONTENTS

where
                                          X GmA
                                   w0 =                ,                         (66)
                                                rA
                                          A

where rA = x − xA (t), rA = |rA |, and

                                                     "                  #
           X GmA                  X GmB                      2
                                                     1 (rA vA )           
      ∆=                −2va2 +                +           2    + rA aA   ,      (67)
                  rA                    rBA         2    rA            
            A                     B̸=A



with rAB = |xB − xA |. We should note that this corresponds to the metric

recommended by the International Astronomical Union (Soffel, 2003), subject to cor-

rections accounting for the fact that celestial bodies are not point-like but extended

objects, and that these bodies possess angular momentum relative to the frame that is

fixed with respect to distant objects, such as quasars. Fortunately, these corrections

are numerically small, such that they can safely be added a posteriori at the leading

order, without impacting the calculation of the next-to-leading order.

     Now, injecting this metric into the definition of the Lagrangian of motion Eq.

(18), one gets for a test particle B the following Lagrangian of motion

                                             4
                 v2    X GmA mB         mB vB
LB = −mB c2 + mB B +                  +    2
                  2            rAB       8c
                       A̸=B

                                               (vA · rAB )2
                                                                      
     1 X GmA mB                    3 2     2                  rAB · aA
   + 2                −4vA · vB + vB + 2vA −         2      −
    c        rAB                   2              2rAB           2
       A̸=B
                                              
     1 X GmA mB  X GmD             X 1 GmD
                                                + O(c−4 ).
   − 2                           +
    c        rAB            rAD         2 rDB
           A̸=B             D̸=A              D̸=B



Injecting this Lagrangian into the Euler-Lagrange equation Eq. (7), one finally gets

the Einstein-Infeld-Hoffman-Droste-Lorentz (EIHDL) equation of motion given in

Eq. (90) in Sec. 3.3.
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                 CONTENTS           35

The advance of perihelion of Mercury

When focusing solely on the two-body problem, one can examine the secular changes

of the orbital elements by treating the c−4 term in the equation of motion Eq. (90) as

perturbations to Keplerian orbits. For instance, the secular advance of a perihelion in

the two-body problem can be expressed as follows


                                         G(m1 + m2 )
                              ∆ϖ̇ = 6π                ,                           (68)
                                         a(1 − e2 )c2


where a is the Keplerian semi-major axis, e the eccentricity and mi the mass of the

body i.




2.1.9 The propagation of light in general relativity

From the Lagrangian of a free electromagnetic field Eq. (40), one derives the

following equation for the free electromagnetic field in a curved spacetime


                   ∇σ F ασ = ∂σ F ασ + Γα
                                        σϵ F
                                             ϵσ
                                                + Γσσϵ F αϵ = 0,                  (69)


where ∇σ defines the covariant derivatives associated to the Christoffel connection

Eq. (43). Using the definition of the electromagnetic tensor in Sec. 2.1.6, and trans-

lating the 4-vector potential in terms of electric and magnetic fields (Jackson, 1998),

one recovers the equations of Maxwell for free electromagnetic fields if spacetime
                   ⃗ = 0 and □m B
is flat—that is □m E            ⃗ = 0, where □m is the usual D’Alembertian

of flat Minkowski spacetimes defined in Eq. (61). Considering the Lorenz gauge

∇σ Aσ = 0, Eq. (69) reduces to



                              □Aα − g ασ Rσϵ Aϵ = 0.,                             (70)
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


36     CONTENTS

where one defines the covariant D’Alembertian as □ = g σϵ ∇σ ∇ϵ . Now, let us

expand the 4-vector potential as follows (Misner et al., 1973)

                               n                                   o
                      Aµ = R       aµ + ϵbµ + O ϵ2          expiθ/ϵ ,
                                                       
                                                                                  (71)


where R{X} means the real part of X . The leading order in the ϵ expansion

corresponds to the geometric optics approximation. It induces that


                                     k σ ∇σ k α = 0,                              (72)


where the wave-vector is defined as k α := g ασ ∂σ θ and


                               kσ k σ = gσϵ k σ k ϵ = 0.                          (73)


 Eq. (72) means that in the geometric optics limit, electromagnetic waves follow

spacetime geodesics
                                dk α
                                     + Γα   µ ν
                                        µν k k = 0,                               (74)
                                 dλ
where λ is an affine parameter of the geodesics, such that k α = dxα /dλ. Eq. (73)

means that those geodesics are such that the line element is null (ds2 = 0) along the

trajectories of the electromagnetic waves in the geometric optics approximation. One

therefore generically says that light follows null-geodesics, although this is in fact

correct only in the geometric optics approximation. The fact that ds2 = 0 along the

geodesics of light implies that the trajectory lies on the null spacetime cones, which

define the causal structure of spacetime. In other words, the speed of light is indeed

equivalent to the speed c appearing in the definition of the line element Eq. (36). But

it also means that there is no notion of proper time for light since the line element

ds2 = −c2 dτ 2 is null along their geodesics.
                                    Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                                     CONTENTS      37




Fig. 3 Illustration of an electromagnetic wave with frequency νA emitted by OA with a wave four-vector
                  µ                                                                                 µ
of components kA    and received by OB at a frequency νB and with a wave four-vector of components kA .
Figure taken from (Hees et al., 2014a), with the authorization of the lead author.


Null-geodesics and astrometric observables

Because electromagnetic waves follow null-geodesics of a curved spacetime in the

geometric optic approximation, the trajectories of electromagnetic waves are curved

in general, notably leading to the deflection mentioned in Sec. 2.1.5 and represented

in Fig. 2.

       One side of astrometry is about determining the projection of the positions of

celestial bodies on the celestial sphere as they are seen by an observer, based on their

angular measurements. Indeed, as detailed in Sec. 2.1.5, what measures an observer

are the angles between the null-cones that link them to the sources of the observed

electromagnetic waves.

       As explained notably in (Hees et al., 2014a), one way to get a covariant defi-

nition16 of the position of the electromagnetic sources in the celestial sphere as it

appears for an observer, is to use the tetrad formalism (Misner et al., 1973; Klioner

and Kopeikin, 1992), by giving the direction of observation of an incoming electro-

magnetic wave in a tetrad E comoving with the observer OB , as one can see in Fig.
             µ
3. We write E⟨α⟩ the components of this tetrad, where ⟨α⟩ corresponds to the tetrad

  16
       That is, a definition that is invariant under change of coordinate systems.
                                  Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


38        CONTENTS

index and µ is a normal tensor index that can be lowered and raised by use of the

metric. The tetrad is assumed to be orthonormal so that


                                                µ    ν
                                           gµν E⟨α⟩ E⟨β⟩ = η⟨α⟩⟨β⟩ ,                                                (75)


                                                   µ
η being the flat Minkowski metric, and the vector E⟨0⟩ is chosen to be timelike, such
      µ
that E⟨i⟩ is spacelike. Then, the wave-vector kµ = gµν k ν becomes in the tetrad frame

associated to the observer
                                                         µ
                                                 k⟨α⟩ = E⟨α⟩ kµ .                                                   (76)

The incident direction of the wave in the tetrad frame is given by the following

normalization
                                                  k ⟨i⟩              k ⟨i⟩    k⟨i⟩
                               n⟨i⟩ = p                         =      ⟨0⟩
                                                                           =−      .                                (77)
                                              δjk k ⟨j⟩ k ⟨k⟩        k        k⟨0⟩
This quantity is the actual astrometric observable at the location of the observer. For

more details, we refer the reader to (Misner et al., 1973; Klioner and Kopeikin, 1992;

Hees et al., 2014a).

     The other side of astrometry is about determining the distance of remote objects,

which leads us to the concept of the Shapiro delay.


Shapiro delay

In the solar system, most of the time, the trajectory of light can be approximated

as being straight lines at leading order.17 That is, one has xi (t) = ni c(t − te ) +

xie + O(c−2 )—where e stands for the emission, and ni is a constant normalized

vector. One can use this information in order to compute the coordinate time elapsed

between the emission and the reception of light, without the need to actually solve

the geodesic equation Eq. (74). From the null condition Eq. (73), one has, indeed,

   17
      This approximation holds true when one is sufficiently distant from the gravitational lensing regime, but starts to
fail near this regime, resulting in the emergence of the so-called enhanced terms during the derivation of light trajectory
in geometric configurations where this approximation is only marginally accurate (Ashby and Bertotti, 2010; Linet and
Teyssandier, 2016). For a brief discussion on this matter, we refer to Sec. 3.4.1.
                          Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                        CONTENTS          39

that ds2 = 0 between the emission and the reception of the electromagnetic wave.

This means that gµν dxν dxµ = 0, where gµν is given by Eqs. (49-51). However, since

light travels at the speed of light, v i /c is not a negligible quantity, and it is necessary

to maintain the same order of development in terms of c−n in the metric to account

for all the relevant terms at a given order for the propagation of light. As a result,

when considering deviations from the trajectory of light relative to special relativity

up to the order O(c−3 ), the relevant metric is

                                            
           2U                       2U
    2
 ds = − 1 − 2             2   2
                          c dt + 1 + 2             (dx2 + dy 2 + dz 2 ) + O(c−3 ) = 0, (78)
            c                        c


where U = w + O(c−2 )—see Eqs. (28) and (52). Integrating over this equation, one

gets the coordinate time elapsed between the emission and the reception Ter = tr −te

                                                    Z r
                                               2
                      c Ter = |xir − xie | +              U dl + O(c−3 ),               (79)
                                               c2    e

where the integration is taken along the straight line xi (t) = ni (t − te ) + xie that

connects the emission and the reception events. It appears as if light experiences a

delay due to the presence of a gravitational field. This delay is known as the Shapiro

delay, named after Irwin Shapiro who was the first to predict this effect (Shapiro,

1964). More on this delay in Sec. 3.4.1.

    Hence, the Shapiro delay has to be taken into account in order to recover the

distance—in terms of a given coordinate system—from the measured round-trip

propagation time. This means that distances constructed from observations not only

depend on the coordinate system being used, but also depend on the model for the

gravitational potential U along the trajectory of the electromagnetic wave.

    It is crucial to have in mind that what is typically probed by solar system

experiments—such as in (Bertotti et al., 2003b)—is not so much the delay in Eq.

(79), but rather its variation as the observed electromagnetic signal traverses different
                                  Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


40        CONTENTS

sections of the gravitational potential U .18 More specifically, these experiments usu-

ally probe the delay variation with respect to the the minimum distance between the

electromagnetic signal trajectory and the gravitating body (also called impact param-

eter). For a comprehensive discussion on this topic, we direct readers to Chapter 6.3

in Wald (1984).


2.1.10 Alternative gravitational theories

All the aspects of the aforementioned content may be subject to modifications in an

alternative theory to general relativity—see Sec. 4. Hence, one must exercise caution

when considering alternative theories of gravity, as the introduced modifications can

impact the entire modeling process—from the definition of the coordinate system, to

the equations of motion of light and massive bodies—and consequently the analysis

of the observations.


2.2 Basics on Ephemeris

An ephemeris is a table of positions and velocities given at different time steps. One

can compute an ephemeris for artificial satellites, planetary bodies (planets, natural

satellites, asteroids, comets...) but also pulsars. In order to provide to the user accu-

rate estimations of the dynamical states of the considered body, several ingredients

are necessary.



     First, one needs to agree upon a set of both time and space coordinates given in

a properly defined frame. This frame will be preferably inertial and the coordinate

system will give an easily understandable representation of the body motion. This

coordinate system will also be used to confront the dynamical modeling of the motion

to the observations (see in step 3). The selection of the frame—in which the motion

   18
      The mathematical expression of the delay as given in Eq. (79) is gauge-dependent, and thus does not represent an
observable quantity by itself. For detailed discussions on this, we refer readers to Gao and Wald (2000); Minazzoli et al.
(2019).
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                   CONTENTS           41

and the observations will be described—and its characterisation in space and time

(metrics) will constitute the step 1 of the ephemeris construction (red boxes in Fig. 4).

   Second, we shall identify and develop the appropriate dynamical model for

describing the most accurately the motion of the bodies. This step (black box in Fig.

4) requires the writing of an equation of motion according to the frame defined in the

step 1. In the dynamical modeling, one must include all the gravitational perturba-

tions expected for the considered system. A numerical integration of the equations of

motion is also usually performed in order to provide to the users positions and veloc-

ities for discrete times. Analytical resolutions were also proposed up to the beginning

of the XXI century but stopped when the planetary observations became too accu-

rate in regards to the size of the analytical series (see for example Fienga and Simon

(2005)).

   At this step, one may consider that the ephemeris is built. However, in particu-

lar in the solar system, the localisation of the object of interest has been monitored

by observers and a comparison between its modeled and observed dynamical states

(positions and velocities) is used for improving the model and then, to continue the

process of construction of the ephemeris.

   It is important to stress that the transformation from computed positions and

velocities to observed quantities (direct radar range to the planetary surface, s/c nav-

igation range and frequency shift, angular positions, pulsar time of arrival) requires

some hypothesis on the space and time coordinate system in play and on how the

observations have been obtained (see for example the Shapiro delay in Sec. 4.2.5 or

Sec. 3.5). The data used for building planetary ephemerides are then not independent

from the framework used for describing gravity.

   In a third step, we consider the information on the positions and/or velocities

obtained by the observers. As explained previously, and as it will be described in

details in Sec. 3.4 in the case of planetary ephemerides, these informations are
                         Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


42      CONTENTS

deduced from observations that can be ranges, frequency shifts, angular positions

relative to reference stellar or quasi-stellar objects (part of astrometric catalogues or

not) in different wavelengths (from optical to radio), in most of the cases centered on

Earth or on specific locations at its surface. In general, at this step (blue boxes in Fig.

4), the observations are closely analysed in order to remove outliers, and to identify

and correct potential biases and systematics.

     The forth step (orange box in Fig. 4) is the confrontation between the observed

quantities analysed at step 3 and the same quantities estimated with the dynami-

cal model at step 2. From this comparison, are obtained the residuals, which are

the differences between model and observations. In order to have the most accurate

modelisation of the observed positions, one looks for minimizing the residuals by

considering different causes:

• a mismodeling in the motion of the body. In this case, the step 2 has to be

  reconsidered and the dynamical modeling modified for example by adding more

  perturbations.
• parameters used in the model that are not close enough from their real values. The

  model is then corrected by updating the values of the parameters.
• some systematics or bias in the observations were not accounted for properly and

  still remain in the residuals. A modification of step 4 is then necessary.

It is of course not easy to isolate the different causes of the residuals. But, neverthe-

less, in order to reduce the differences obtained at step 4, one systematically starts

with correcting the parameters of the model by using either a classic least squares

method or a Bayesian approach (see for example the discussion in Sec. 3.5). Once

the model has its parameters updated considering the current set of observations, if

residuals still present some signatures different from white noise, one can investigate

the correctness of the dynamical modeling or the data analysis procedure. This very
                              Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                                  CONTENTS               43




Fig. 4 Schematic representation of the construction of ephemeris applied to the planetary case. SSB stands
for solar system barycenter (see Sec. 3.2.4), TDB (UTC) stands for Barycentric Dynamimcal Time (Uni-
versal Time Coordinate, respectively) (see Sec. 3.2.2). The description of the dynamical model is the case
of planetary ephemerides is done in Sec. 3.3, and the presentation of the observational data sets in Sec. 3.4



generic procedure—-that can be used for a wide set of natural or artificial bodies—

- can be sketched by Fig. 4. This Figure shows that the definition of the frame in

which will be described both the motion and the observations is a crucial step for

the prediction of the dynamical status of whatever object, from artificial satellites to

quasi-stellar objects.

    With the improvement of the measurement accuracy on planetary positions and

velocities, the Newtonian paradigm of an universe with flat Cartesian coordinate sys-

tems and straight photon path failed to explain the observations. As discussed in

introduction, the first evidence of the Newtonian failure was the case of the advance

of perihelia of Mercury, explained by Einstein (1915). On Table 1, are compared the

accuracies reached by three generations of planetary ephemerides and the advance of

perihelia as predicted by general relativity. It is immediately visible that even with

the Gaillot ephemerides in the late XIX century (Gaillot, 1888; Gaillot and Le Ver-

rier, 1913), after three years of observations, the accumulated advance of perihelia
                             Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


44       CONTENTS

Table 1 4 generations of planetary ephemerides: accuracies of the observations used for the construction
of the ephemerides either with angular measurements (Columns labeled angle) or with direct distance
radar and spacecraft tracking observations (Columns labeled distance Earth-). These values give an idea
of the expected precision obtained by the ephemerides during the period of observations indicated in the
second row of the Table. It does not preclude from a degradation of the quality of the ephemerides out
from the period. The last column gives the estimation of the advance of perihelia ∆ϖ̇ as computed with
general relativity. For the earth, ∆ϖ̇ is of about 0.1 ”.yr−1 .
 Ephemerides                 Gaillot                    DE102             DE440/INPOP19a              GR
                  Gaillot and Le Verrier (1913)     Standish (1983)        Park et al. (2021)
                                                                         Fienga et al. (2019a)
     Data span             1800-1913                   1913-1983              1924-2021
                   angle               distance    angle    distance     angle         distance      ∆ϖ̇
                                        Earth-                Earth-                     Earth-
                      ”                     km          ”        km          ”              km     ”.yr−1
      Mercury          1                    450    0.050           5     0.002           0.004        0.43
        Venus        0.5                    100    0.050           2     0.002            0.006       0.14
         Mars        0.5                    150    0.050       0.050     0.001          0.0015      0.065
       Jupiter       0.5                  1400        0.1         10     0.010           0.020      0.019
       Saturn        0.5                  3000        0.1        600     0.001           0.020      0.010
       Uranus          1                 12700        0.2       2540     0.050               10     0.005
      Neptune          1                 22000        0.2       4400     0.050                50   0.0033
         Pluto         1                 24000        0.2       4800     0.050            2400     0.0027




for Mercury (1.29 seconds of arc) is greater than the observational accuracy of this

epoch (1 second of arc). This leads to the choice of general relativity as a preferred

framework over Newton’s laws.

     However, other frameworks can also be proposed for describing the most accurate

astrometric observations of planets in our solar system. In most cases, these alter-

native theories tend asymptotically to general relativity in the context of our weak

field solar system. In Section 4, we review the alternative gravity models for which

dedicated planetary ephemerides have been constructed and published in existing lit-

erature. We prioritize these models because we believe that only a fully developed

ephemeris, as described in Fig. 4, can conclusively constrain, or even rule out, an

alternative theory of gravitation. For a detailed discussion with examples, we refer to

Section 5.
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                 CONTENTS           45

3 Planetary and lunar ephemerides in General relativity

3.1 State-of-the-art for planetary and lunar ephemerides

The motion of the planets and asteroids in our solar system can be solved directly by

the numerical integration of their equations of motion, or with analytical approxima-

tions of their orbits. As it has been shown in Fienga and Simon (2005), the analytical

models for the main planet orbits are not accurate enough (due to the limited number

of terms in the series) in comparison with the meter level uncertainties reached by the

modern observations of planets. Therefore, in the following, we will only consider

the planetary ephemerides in their numerical form.

   Based on the first preliminary versions of the numerical integration of planetary

motions (Devine and Dunham, 1966; Ash et al., 1967), the DE96 JPL ephemerides

(Standish et al., 1976) was first of the known and widely distributed accurate numer-

ical ephemerides fitted to observations developed by JPL. These were followed

by DE102 (Standish, 1983), DE200 (Standish, 1990), DE403 (Standish, 1995)

and DE405 (Standish, 2001). All these ephemerides are numerically integrated

with a variable step-size, variable-order, Adams method. Their dynamical model

includes point-mass interactions between the eight planets and Pluto, the Sun and

a diverse number of asteroids, relativistic PPN effects (Moyer, 1971, 2000) and

lunar librations (Newhall et al., 1983). Since DE96, regular improvements have

been added to the DE ephemerides. Ephemerides such as DE421 (Folkner et al.,

2008), DE430 (Folkner et al., 2014a) and DE440 (Park et al., 2021) have been

constructed and fitted with increasingly dense sets of space mission tracking data.

Numerical ephemerides have also been developed at the Institute of Applied Astron-

omy of the Russian Academy of Sciences (EPM) and at the Observatory of Paris

and the Côte d’Azur Observatory (INPOP). They are based on a dynamical model

similar to the JPL one but with specific characteristics, in particular regarding the

interactions between the main planets and the asteroids. Several possible additional
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


46      CONTENTS

contributions have been included in the EPM ephemerides such as the interactions

of Trans-Neptunian Objects (TNOs) by the mean of one or several rings (Pitjeva

and Pitjev, 2018) and the influence with the Jupiter Trojens (Pitjeva and Pitjev,

2020). The EPM ephemerides, are fitted to optical, radar and space tracking data

and have an accuracy comparable to the JPL ephemerides (Krasinsky et al., 1988;

Krasinskii et al., 1993; Pitjeva, 2001, 2005a; Pitjeva and Pitjev, 2014). They have

been intensively used for estimating PPN parameters and the hypothetical secular

variation of the gravitational constant (Pitjeva, 1993, 2005b; Pitjeva et al., 2021).

Since 2003, INPOP planetary ephemerides are developed, integrating numerically

the Einstein-Infeld-Hoffmann-Droste-Lorentz (EIHDL) equation, as proposed by

Moyer (1971, 2000) (see sect. 3), and fitting the parameters of the dynamical model

to the most accurate planetary observations. The main INPOP releases are INPOP08

(Fienga et al., 2009), INPOP10a (Fienga et al., 2011a), INPOP17a (Viswanathan

et al., 2017), and INPOP19a (Fienga et al., 2019b). For this family of ephemerides,

a specific care has been brought on the consistency between the GR framework

defined by the IAU and the actual equations of motion and time-scale used in the

ephemerides. In particular in 2009, INPOP08 (Fienga et al., 2009) was the first

ephemeris built with consistent planetary orbits and time-scales (see sect. 3.2.2). In

2010, INPOP10a (Fienga et al., 2011a) was also the first to fit the gravitational mass

of the Sun instead of the astronomical unit for consistency reasons.



     These three families of planetary ephemerides differ in the dynamical model

(see sect. 3.3.2) such as the number of point-mass objects (more or less main-belt

asteroids, TNOs) to consider in the EIHDL point-mass interaction, additional accel-

erations to implement (Lense-Thirring acceleration, TNOs rings, Trojan rings, etc.)

as well as in the size of the planetary datasets used for the adjustments of the mod-

els (see sect 3.4) and by the way this adjustment is performed (see sect 3.5). Table
                              Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                                CONTENTS               47

Table 2 Solve-for parameters for recent ephemerides. S01 Standish (2001), F08 Folkner et al. (2008),
F14 Folkner et al. (2014a), P17 Park et al. (2017), P05 Pitjeva (2005a), P14 Pitjeva and Pitjev (2014), P18
Pitjeva and Pitjev (2018), P21 Pitjeva et al. (2021), F09 stands for Fienga et al. (2009), F11 for Fienga
et al. (2011a), F19 Fienga et al. (2019b), F21 Fienga et al. (2021a). Column 3 and 4 indicate the model
used for describing the perturbations induced by the main belt asteroids as well as the number of
corresponding parameters where Columns 5 and 6 give the same informations but for Trans-Neptunian
objects (sect. 3.3.2). Column 7 indicates which ephemeris accounts for the Lense-Thirring acceleration
(see sect. 3.3.3) and Column 8 if the ephemeris was built with the astronomical unit (AU) fitted or with
the gravitational mass of the sun fitted (GM⊙ ). It also gives if the integration of the TT-TDB equation
was done simultaneously with the equations of motion (see sect. 3.2.2). Finally, Column 9 gives the time
interval covered by the observations used for the fit.

                Ref         Main Belt asteroids                   TNO                  Others          Period
                        Model             Fit             Model           Fit    LT
 DE
 DE405          S01     300                 3 GM +        N               N      N      AU             1924:1998
                                            3 densities
 DE421          F08     343                 11 GM +       N               N      N      AU             1924: 2007
                                            3 densities
 DE430          F14     343                 343 GM        N               N      N      GM⊙ ,TDB       1924:2018
 DE440          P17     343                 343 GM        36 + 1 ring     1      Y      GM⊙ ,TDB       1924:2020
 EPM
 EPM2004        P05     301 + 1 ring        6 GM +        N               N      N      AU             1913: 2004
                                            3 densities
 EPM2011        P14     301 + 1 ring        21 GM +       21 + 1 ring     1      N      AU,TDB         1913:2011
                                            3 densities
 EPM2017        P18     301 + 1 ring        21 GM +       30 + 3 rings    1      Y      GM⊙ ,TDB       1913:2016
                                            3 densities
 EPM2019        P21     301 + 1 ring +      24 GM +       30 + 3 rings    1      Y      GM⊙ ,TDB       1913:2017
                        2 Trojan groups     3 densities
 INPOP
 INPOP08a       F09     300 + 1 ring        34 GM +       N               N      N      AU,TDB         1913:2007
                                            3 densities
 INPOP10a       F11     289 + 1 ring        145 GM        N               N      N      GM⊙ ,TDB       1913:2010
 INPOP19a       F19     343                 343 GM        9 + 3 rings     1      N      GM⊙ ,TDB       1924:2019
 INPOP21a       F21     343                 343 GM        509             1      Y      GM⊙ ,TDB       1924:2020




2 summarises these distinctions. However, it is important to stress that, despite their

specific characteristics, the accuracy of these models are very close to each other and

involve towards an even closer consistency.




3.2 Reference frame theory in general relativity

The general relativistic framework of the planetary ephemerides since 2006 is the

one summarized by the IAU2000 and IAU2006 conventions (Soffel, 2003; Petit and

Luzum, 2010).
                         Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


48      CONTENTS

     Because general relativity is a covariant theory, an infinite set of coordinate sys-

tems could be used in principle in order to describe space-time events—see Sec 2.1.

The International Astronomical Union (IAU) has therefore set the standard coor-

dinate systems that people are recommended to use, notably through the IAU2000

recommendations (Soffel, 2003). Two main reference systems have been defined, as

well as the transformation between one another: the barycentric celestial reference

system (BCRS) and the geocentric celestial reference system (GCRS). Both refer-

ence systems are defined at the post-Newtonian level and use the harmonic gauge.

Beyond the harmonic gauge condition, the freedom in chosing the coordinate systems

is further reduced by fixing the form and properties of the metric and the gravitational

potentials.

     Planetary ephemerides are integrated in the BCRS and are linked to the realiza-

tion of ICRS, by VLBI observations of s/c orbiting planets (see sect. 3.2.3).




3.2.1 general relativity Barycentric Metric

The BCRS is defined with the coordinates (ct,xi ), where t =TCB (see sect. 3.2.2).

The metric is taken to be kinematically fixed with respect to distant quasi stellar

objects (QSO). The catalog gathering QSO astrometric positions and velocities used

as fixed standards for the definition of the kinematically fixed BCRS is the Interna-

tional Celestial Reference Frame (ICRF) (Ma et al., 1998; Fey et al., 2015; Charlot

et al., 2020). The general form of the BCRS metric is taken to be the following

(Soffel, 2003) (see Sec. 2.1.7 for details on its derivation)


                                        2w 2w2
                          g00 = − 1 +      − 4 + O(c−5 )
                                        c2   c
                                  4wi
                          g0i = −   3
                                      + O(c−4 )
                                  c      
                                       2w
                          gij =δij 1 + 2 + O(c−3 ) ,                                (80)
                                       c
                         Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                   CONTENTS           49

where w and wi are respectively a scalar gravitational potential and a vector poten-

tial, c being the speed of light. The harmonic gauge conditions then imply that the

potentials w and wi satisfy the following equations:


                         1 ∂2
                                 
                       − 2 2 + ∇ w = −4πGσ + O c−4 ,
                                2
                                                      
                                                                                    (81)
                        c ∂t
                               ∇2 wi = −4πGσ i + O c−2 ,
                                                      
                                                                                    (82)


where σ and σ i are the gravitational mass and mass current defined upon the stress-

energy tensor:
                              1                           1 0i
                                 T 00 + T ss ,     σi =
                                            
                         σ=                                 T .                     (83)
                              c2                          c
In this definition, the gravitational perturbations induced by other bodies in the vicin-

ity of the solar system (stars, galaxies, dark matter, dark energy) are ignored. The

solar system is considered as an isolated system—which is possible in general rel-

ativity, thanks to the equivalence principle and the resulting “effacement of internal

degrees of freedom in the global problem and of the external world in the local sys-

tem” (Damour, 1989; Klioner and Soffel, 2000), but not in general for alternative

theories of gravity—e.g. not in MOND (Milgrom, 2009, 2014), see Sec. 4.7. For a

solar system composed by non-rotating point-mass objects, the previous barycentric
                                          i
potentials are w = A wA and wi = A wA
                  P                 P
                                            with



                                                        
                    2
                                  1 (rA .vA )2
                                                      
            µA    vA   1 X µB
       wA =     1+2 2 − 2       − 2      2     + rA .aA  ,
            rA     c   c    rBA  c     rA
                                    B̸=A

        i     µA i
       wA =     v ,                                                                 (84)
              rA A
                              Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


50       CONTENTS




Fig. 5 Various relativistic time-scales and their relations. Each of the coordinate time-scales TCB, TCG,
TT and TDB can be related to the proper time τA of an observer A, provided that the trajectory of the
observer in the BCRS and/or GCRS is known (Petit and Luzum, 2010). Dashed lines represent transfor-
mations with fixed rates, whereas full lines represent transformations that depend on the metric potentials,
following to the IAU recommendations (Soffel, 2003).



where µA := GmA is the gravitational parameter of the body A, rAT is the relative

position of body T with respect to A, rAT = |rAT | and vA is the coordinate velocity

of body A while aA is its coordinate acceleration in the BCRS.

     The same type of framework can be defined for a reference system centered on the

Earth center of mass and leads to the definition of the Geocentric Celestial Reference

System (GCRS). The GCRS is suitable in practice for the modeling of processes in

the vicinity of the Earth, whereas the metrics of Eqs. (80) and (84) will be used for

modeling the light propagation and motion of celestial objects in the solar system in

the BCRS.

     The coordinate transformations between the BCRS and the GCRS involve a com-

plicated set of functions that are defined in the resolution B1.3 of the IAU2000

resolution (Soffel, 2003).



3.2.2 Time-scales in the solar system

The time-scales in the BCRS and GCRS are denoted by TCB and TCG, respectively

(Soffel, 2003). The relation between TCB and TCG are given in Soffel (2003). At the

Earth level, the Terrestrial Time (TT) has been defined in order to remain close to the

realized atomic time (TAI). It differs from the TCG by a constant rate (Soffel, 2003).
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                  CONTENTS           51

   Likewise, at the level of the solar system barycenter, the TDB is defined as a

linear transformation of the TCB. The relations between the various time scales is

shown in Fig. 5.

   The difference between TT and TDB is produced by planetary ephemerides, by

integrating the following equation together with the equations of motion (Klioner,

2008; Fienga et al., 2009)


           d(T T − T DB)       1                       1
                         =(LB + a)(1 + LB − LG ) − LG + b,                         (85)
              d(T DB)          c2                      c4


with LB and LG are defining constants for TDB relatively to TCB and TT relatively

to TCG, respectively (see i.e. Klioner (2008); Petit and Luzum (2010) for the full

definition) and where


             1      X µA
        a = − vT2 −
             2           rAT
                    A̸=T
                                2            (
             1 4    1  X µA         X µA                3
        b = − vT +                  +            4vT .vA − vT2 − 2vA
                                                                   2
             8      2        rAT           rAT            2
                        A̸=T          A̸=T
                                    2 X          )
             1            1 vA .rAT             µB
            + aA .rAT +                  +            ,                            (86)
             2            2    rAT             rBA
                                                B̸=A



following the notations of Eq. (84). In Park et al. (2021), terms related to the pertur-

bations induced by the oblateness of the Sun were also added in the DE440 (TT-TDB)

computation.

Finally, planetary observations are also related to time. Following the IERS conven-

tions (Petit and Luzum, 2010), those observations obtained on the ground are given

in UTC, related to TDB by TT and TAI. The observations obtained in other planetary

systems (i.e. positions of a spacecraft orbiting Mercury) are, up to now, given also

in UTC as the differences between the coordinate time defined for the corresponding
                         Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


52      CONTENTS

planetary system (in the previous example, Mercury) and TDB or TT, are not sig-

nificant at the present day accuracy. However, with missions such as Bepi-Colombo,

it will be necessary to account for the local gravitational potential in the definition

of the observational time scales (i.e Turyshev et al. (2013a); Nelson and Ely (2006);

Milani et al. (2002)). In conclusion, it is important to keep in mind that the various

measured proper times are converted beforehands into coordinate times—according

to the laws of general relativity.


3.2.3 Inertial Frame

The coordinate frame of the planetary and lunar ephemerides is linked to the Inter-

national Celestial Reference System (ICRS) by its current realization achieved by

VLBI measurements of the positions of extragalactic radio sources (i.e., quasars)

defined in the ICRF (Standish, 1998b). The planetary orbits are tied to ICRF because

the observations used for their adjustment have been obtained in the ICRF. For the

inner planets, the VLBI observations of Venus and Mars-orbiting missions give a

tie with an accuracy better than the milliarcsecond (Fienga et al., 2011a; Folkner

et al., 2014a). For the outer planets, the link is maintained with the same level of

uncertainty thanks the VLBI observations of Juno and Cassini (Jones et al., 2019;

Fienga et al., 2011a; Folkner et al., 2014a) orbiting Jupiter and Saturn, respectively.

Some other methods have been investigated for enhancing the link between planetary

ephemerides and ICRF. In particular, one can notice the use of Lunar Laser Rang-

ing observations (Pavlov, 2020) and the use of GAIA DR2 asteroid positions (Deram

et al., 2022). The tie between the planetary ephemerides frame and ICRF is confirmed

to be sub-mas level accuracy in both approaches.


3.2.4 Definition of the solar system barycenter (SSB)

The definition of the solar system barycenter at the origin of the time of integration

is based on the hypothesis of the conservation of the energy of the dynamical system
                           Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                             CONTENTS    53

composed by the planets, the Moon and the asteroids (including Trans-Neptunian

Objects) in the solar system. The position R and the velocity V of the center of mass

are then invariant. Using the notation of DE430 (Folkner et al., 2014b), it comes

                                 
                                      P ∗
                                 R = Pi µi ∗ri = 0
                                 
                                 
                                            i µi
                                                                                        (87)
                                 V = dR = 0
                                 
                                 
                                      dt



where ri and vi being respectively its barycentric position and velocity vectors of the

planet i. µ∗ is given by

                      
                                      vi2
                                                           
                        ∗                   1
                                                P      µj
                        µ  = µ    1 +   2 − 2c2
                      
                      
                      
                        i    i       2c         j̸ =i r ij
                      
                      
                                                                                        (88)
                      
                      
                      
                               P                                       
                      µ̇∗ = µi
                                                  (rj −ri ).(vj +vi )
                                         j̸=i µj
                      
                            i    2c2                        3
                                                          rij



with µi the product of the gravitational constant G with the inertial mass of the body

i. The term µ̇∗i is not included in DE430 nor DE440 ephemerides (Folkner et al.,

2014c; Park et al., 2021) but is accounted for in the INPOP ephemerides (Fienga

et al., 2008). The positions and velocities of the SSB are then obtained by integration

of the following equations and up to the c−2 order,

                                
                                 i µ∗i ri = 0
                                
                                P
                                                                                        (89)
                                 i µ∗i vi + µ̇∗i ri = 0
                                
                                P



In the INPOP formalism (Fienga et al., 2008), Eqs. (89) and (88) are solved only

at the initial step of the planetary integration and a constant vector in positions and

velocities is subtracted to all the body positions and velocities for having R and V

to 0. Once the frame is centered on the SSB defined by Eq. (89) at J2000 (inital
                         Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


54      CONTENTS

date of integration for INPOP epehemerides), the equations of motion of the solar

system bodies and of the Sun are integrated in this fixed frame. The method described

here is used by the INPOP planetary ephemerides since INPOP08 (Fienga et al.,

2008). In JPL DE430 ephemerides (Folkner et al., 2014a), the Sun initial coordinates

are set up such as R and V are 0, the equations of motion of the Sun, the Moon,

planets, and asteroids being then integrated in the fixed frame. In the former JPL DE

versions, such as DE421 (Folkner et al., 2008), the Sun coordinates were set up at

each step of integration for maintaining R and V to 0 all along the integration process.

A description of the successive SSB implementations for older JPL versions can be

found in Folkner et al. (2014a) and discussions concerning possible uncertainties are

presented in Fienga et al. (2008) and Folkner et al. (2014a). It is interesting to note

that, for the tests of the Equivalence Principle (sect. 4.2), µi of Eq. (89) and (88) will

still correspond to the product of G with the inertial mass of the body. It will then

differ from the gravitational mass used for computing the planetary acceleration as

in Eq. (90).




3.3 The dynamical model

3.3.1 Point-mass interactions

In the context of Soffel (2003) and of the metric defined in Eq. (80) and (84), one

can then, in the mass-monopole approximation, write the equations of motion of

bodies as well as the conservation laws satisfied by the SSB as given in Damour and

Vokrouhlický (1995). In BCRS, the equation of motion for the point-mass interaction

is given by




                 X µA
       aT = −            3    rAT
                        rAT
                 A̸=T
                           Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                    CONTENTS          55
                                    (                                      2
                  X       µA        2     2             3         rAT .vA
              −           3 c2 rAT vT + 2vA − 4vA .vT − 2
                         rAT                                       rAT
                  A̸=T
                                                                                 )
                                         1            X µB     X µB
                                        − rAT .aA − 4        −
                                         2              rT B     rAB
                                                      B̸=T          B̸=A
                  X        µA
              +              3  [4rAT .vT − 3rAT .vA ] (vT − vA )
                         c2 rAT
                  A̸=T
                  7 X µA
              +             aA ,                                                     (90)
                  2  c2 rAT
                    A̸=T



   This equation is known as the Einstein-Infeld-Hoffmann-Droste-Lorentz

(EIHDL) equation of motion, and it is numerically integrated for obtaining the mod-

ern planetary ephemerides in general relativity at the first post-Newtonian c−2 level.

Additional accelerations induced by the oblateness of the Sun (sect 3.3.4) or frame

dragging effects (sect 3.3.3) are also accounted for in order to describe the motion of

the planets at the level of accuracy required by the modern space mission observa-

tions. Other multipole moments than the Sun quandrupole moment are negligeable

at the current level of accuracy.



3.3.2 Asteroid perturbations

Differences in the number of point-mass perturbations exist between planetary

ephemerides. Table 2 summarizes them by splitting the case of the Main-Belt aster-

oids (MBA) on the one hand, and of the Trans-Neptunian objetcs (TNO) on the

other hand. The problem of the modelisation of the MBA perturbations on the inner

planet orbits has been addressed since DE405 (Standish, 2001). The issue is that

there is a considerable number of objects (at least 250,000), for which the masses are

unknown, that can potentially interact gravitationally with the inner planets (mainly

Mars). With DE405 (Standish, 1998a), 5 asteroids (Ceres, Pallas, Vesta , Iris and

Bamberga) have been identified as the main perturbers associated with an averaging

of the effect induced by the rest of the MBA based on taxonomic classifications. But
                         Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


56      CONTENTS

this modelisation shows its limits with the improvement of the accuracy of the Mars-

orbiter tracking data (Standish and Fienga, 2002). Williams (1984) proposed a list

of 343 individual objects among the MBA gathering the most perturbing asteroids to

consider for the construction of accurate planetary ephemerides. That list has been

confirmed by Kuchynka and Folkner (2013) and since DE430 this is the Williams

(1984) objects that are taken into account in DE and INPOP planetary ephemerides,

with their masses individually fitted to observations together with the initial condi-

tions of planet orbits, the mass of the Sun and the Earth-Moon mass ratio (Folkner

et al., 2014a; Fienga et al., 2019b). A detailed description of the complexity of such

an adjustment is out of the scope of this review but more comments on the accuracy

obtained for these mass determinations can be found in Kuchynka and Folkner (2013)

and Fienga et al. (2020a). In order to overcome this problem, but also to reduce the

time cost of integrating an important number of objects, it has been proposed to sub-

stitute or to complement the MBA individual point-mass contribution by a global

ring potential.

     The first ring modelisation was proposed by Krasinsky et al. (2002) as a static

ring fixed at 2.8 AU from the SSB. An updated model maintaining the total linear

and angular momenta of the system has been implemented in Fienga et al. (2009)

and Kuchynka et al. (2010) as a way to account for additional MBA contribution

associated with a shorter list of individual point-mass perturbers. This approach has

not be retained for MBA in DE (Folkner et al., 2014a) and INPOP (since INPOP13c

(Fienga et al., 2014)) ephemerides but kept in EPM ones associated with individual

mass and density determinations for 3 classes of MBA (Pitjeva and Pitjev, 2018).

     After the introduction of the Juno and Cassini tracking data, it became clear that

the perturbations induced by the TNO have to be included in the model. In Pitjeva and

Pitjev (2018); Di Ruscio et al. (2020b) and Park et al. (2021), individual point-mass

perturbations of the most massive and binary Trans-Neptunian objects have been
                                    Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                          CONTENTS       57

added together with a circular ring for accounting for the average effect of the rest of

the TNO. However as the TNO orbits are more eccentric than the MBA ones, Fienga

et al. (2021a) had introduced, instead of a circular ring, 500 individual point-mass

TNO perturbers with observed orbits19 but of equal mass. This latest assumption sim-

plifies the adjustment as only one parameter (the total mass spread over 500 objects)

is used and fitted for characterising the TNO perturbations.

       The full 1PN general relativity equation of motion is only taken into account for

the first biggest MBA (Ceres, Pallas, Vesta , Iris and Bamberga). For the rest of the

MBA and the TNO point-mass interactions, the perturbations on the planet orbits,

and on the other asteroid orbits, are estimated at the Newtonian level only. This is

done in order to reduce the computational cost, but it is consistent with the overall

PN perturbative approach—given that those perturbations are already very small at

the Newtonian level, such that their contributions at the post-Newtonian level are

negligible.



3.3.3 Lense-Thirring acceleration

The Lense-Thirring (LT) acceleration induced by the Sun rotation has been recently

added in modern planetary ephemerides (Pitjeva and Pitjev, 2018; Park et al., 2021;

Fienga et al., 2021b) . Its new introduction is justified by the accuracy reached by

space missions, especially those close to the Sun and Mercury such as Messenger and

Bepi-Colombo (Genova et al., 2018). It also has been shown that it helps for disen-

tangling the PPN parameters for their contribution to the planetary motions (Fienga

et al., 2021a).

       In 2011, Iorio et al. (2011) has also shown that this effect contributes to about 10%

of the dynamical acceleration induced by the shape of the Sun in General relativity

(see sect. 3.3.4). The acceleration induced by the Lense-Thirring effect generated by

  19
       extracted from the astord database (Moskovitz et al., 2022)
                         Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


58      CONTENTS

a central body (here the Sun) at the first post-Newtonian approximation is given by

                                                      
                            2GS 3k.r
                       aLT = 2 3      (r ∧ v) − (k ∧ v)                                  (91)
                             c r   r2


where G is the gravitational constant, c the speed of light, S is the Sun angular

momentum such as S = S k where k is the direction of the Sun rotation pole defined

according to the IAU right ascension and declination (Archinal et al., 2018), r and

v are the position and velocity vectors of the planet relative to the Sun and γ is the

PPN parameter for the light deflection, equal to 1 in general relativity. The Lense-

Thirring effect hence depends on the Sun angular momentum, S that can be obtained

by considering different models for the Sun rotation including both the rotation of the

convective region well constrained by helioseismology and the rotation of the Sun

core (see Fienga et al. (2021a) for discussion).



3.3.4 Shape of the Sun

Among the solar multipole moments, only the degree 2 order 0 term of the spheri-

cal harmonic decomposition of the Sun gravity field, J⊙
                                                      2 —which is identified to the

oblateness of the Sun— leads to a significant impact on the planetary ephemerides at
                                                                              y
the current level of accuracy. The J⊙                                  x             z
                                    2 induces an acceleration aJ ⊙ = (aJ ⊙ , aJ ⊙ , aJ ⊙ )
                                                                             2   2   2    2

to be added to EIHDL Eq. (90) such as (Sharma et al., 2016; Ivashkin, 2021) :

                       
                                                     2       2       2
                                                2 (x +y −4z )
                         axJ ⊙ =   − 23 µ⊙ J2⊙ R⊙
                       
                       
                       
                                                 x   2r 7    ,
                        2
                       
                       
                                                     2       2       2
                                                2 (x +y −4z )
                        ayJ ⊙ =    − 23 µ⊙ J2⊙ R⊙ y   2r 7    ,                          (92)
                            2
                       
                       
                       
                                                         2       2       2
                       
                                                2 (3x +3y −2z )
                       az ⊙ =     − 23 µ⊙ J2⊙ R⊙
                       
                       
                          J
                                                  z    2r 7
                            2

where µ⊙ and R⊙ are the gravitational parameter and the radius of the Sun, respec-

tively, r is the heliocentric distance of the planet, (x, y, z) being its heliocentric

coordinates.
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                   CONTENTS           59

   It is common to see in the literature dealing with geodesy and geophysics the

contribution of J⊙
                 2 as time variations of the osculating elements of the perturbed orbit

such as (Kaula, 1966; Bertotti et al., 2003a):

                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                   ȧ = 0;    ė = 0; i̇ = 0
                  
                  
                                              2
                               3 ⊙     n     R⊙     2
                                     (1−e ) a2 (5 cos i − 1)
                  ω̇ =
                                 J2      2 2
                                4
                                                                                    (93)
                                                   2
                                                  R⊙
                               − 23 J2⊙ (1−e
                                           n
                  
                  
                  
                  
                   Ω̇ =                     2 )2 a2 cos i
                  
                  
                                                     R2
                  
                               n + 43 J2⊙ (1−en2 )3/2 a⊙       2
                  
                                                       2 (3 cos i − 1)
                  Ṁ =
                  


with a, e, n and i are the semi-major axis, the eccentricity, the mean motion and the

inclination of the planetary orbit impacted by the oblateness of the Sun. M is the

planet mean anomaly. We give these equations Eq. (93) as a simple illustration of

the type of contribution one may get from the Sun quadrupole. It is then clear that

the major contribution of this quadrupole term is on the advance of nodes Ω̇ and

perihelia ω̇ of the planetary orbits. This system of equations is also somehow useful

to apprehend the potential correlations that may appear between the Sun quadrupole

moment and the semi-major axis and eccentricity.

   Fig 6 shows J2⊙ values deduced from planetary ephemerides including or not

the Lense-Thirring contribution. It is clear, from this Figure, that the introduction of

the Lense-Thirring acceleration in the model improves significantly the J2⊙ deter-

minations. The values obtained with LT (Fienga et al., 2021a; Park et al., 2017) are

indeed closer to the ones issued from helioseismologic surveys (Pijpers, 1998; Antia

et al., 2008) than those obtained before the LT introduction (Fienga et al., 2019b;

Iorio et al., 2011; Viswanathan et al., 2017; Fienga et al., 2014; Folkner et al., 2014a;

Fienga et al., 2011a, 2009). In general relativity, the difference in J2⊙ with or without

LT is of about about 7 to 10 % .
                                  Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


60       CONTENTS


                                                 H      N      P−Y       Y


                           D414

                            I08

                           I10a

                           I13c




              References
                           I17a

                           I19a

                           D440

                           I20a

                            A08

                            P98

                           G18

                                      1.6            2.0              2.4               2.8
                                               Sun J2 x107 in GRT
Fig. 6 Values of the Sun oblateness J2⊙ obtained with different ephemerides and other methods in the
general relativity frame. H stands for values deduced from helioseismology, P points values obtained in
a partial fit of planetary orbits (i.e. considering only a couple of planets for the fit, like Mercury and
the Earth), N indicates values obtained before the introduction of the Lense-Thirring acceleration in the
dynamical modeling and Y gives the values obtained after the introduction. The dotted lines give the limits
of the less constraining helioseismologic value from Pijpers (1998). In y-axis, are given the references :
G18 is Genova et al. (2018), P98 Pijpers (1998), A08 Antia et al. (2008), I20a Fienga et al. (2021a), D440
Park et al. (2017), I19a Fienga et al. (2019b), I17a Viswanathan et al. (2017), I13c Fienga et al. (2014),
D414 Konopliv et al. (2006), I10a Fienga et al. (2011a) and I08 Fienga et al. (2009). It is important to note
that in Genova et al. (2018), only the orbit of Mercury is considered.



     As it will be developed in sect. 4.1, the introduction of gravity theories that are

different but close to general relativity induces modifications of the previous Eqs.

(90-92). In this context, the value of J2⊙ can also be determined with planetary

ephemerides in the PPN framework, like given in Table 5 . But we will see that the

value of J2⊙ can be strongly correlated to the value of non-general relativity parame-

ters, and in particular the PPN parameter β (Milani et al., 2002)—as one can get an

intuition from Eq. (100). In sect. 4.1, we will see that the determination of the Sun

oblateness when one includes PPN deviations plays a key role in the context of the

global adjustment of planetary ephemerides .
                              Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                                 CONTENTS                61

Table 3 Detailed example of a planetary ephemeris (here INPOP21a) data sample extracted from (Fienga
et al., 2021b). Column 1 gives the observed planet and information on the type of observations, Column 2
gives the type of data or the name of spacecraft used for producing the data. Columns 3 and 4 give the time
interval and the a priori uncertainties provided by space agencies or the navigation teams, respectively. In
Column 2, M RO for Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter and M O for Mars Orbiter. Flybys stands for average
normal points obtained during a flyby of a spacecraft with U, C, P, V gives the normal points obtained
after the flybys of Ulysses, Cassini, Pionneer and Voyager respectively. radar is for direct radar ranging
on planetary surfaces, V LBI stands for Delta-DOR observations and T ransit + CCD gives the optical
angular observations obtained by transit, photographic plates or CCD. H14 stands for Hees et al. (2014b).
   Planet / Type [unit]                   s/c or method                 Period                Averaged
                                                                                              Accuracy
   Mercury
   Direct range [m]                       Surface                       1971.29 : 1997.60     900
   Radio Science range [m]                Messenger                     2011.23 : 2014.26     5
   Navigation range [m]                   Mariner                       1974.24 : 1976.21     100
   Venus
   VLBI [mas]                             Magellan, Venus Express       1990.70 : 2013.14     2.0
   Direct range [m]                       Surface                       1965.96 : 1990.07     1400
   Navigation range [m]                   Venus Express                 2006.32 : 2011.45     7.0
   Mars
   VLBI [mas]                             MGS, MRO                      1989.13 : 2013.86     0.3
   Navigation range [m]                   Mars Express                  2005.17 : 2019.37     2.0
   Radio Science range [m]                MGS                           1999.31 : 2006.70     2.0
   Radio Science range [m]                MRO/MO                        2002.14 : 2014.00     1.2
   Navigation range [m]                   Viking                        1976.55 : 1982.87     20.0
   Jupiter
   VLBI [mas]                             Galileo                       1996.54 : 1997.94     11
                                          Juno                          2016:2020             0.5
   Optical RA/Dec [arcsec]                Transit+CCD                   1924.34 : 2008.49     0.3
   Flyby RA/Dec [mas]                     U,C, P, V                     1974.92 : 2001.00     8.0
   Flyby range [m]                        U,C, P, V                     1974.92 : 2001.00     2000
   Radio Science range [m]                Juno                          2016.65 : 2020.56     20
   Saturn
   Optical RA/Dec [arcsec]                Transit+CCD                   1924.22 : 2008.34     0.3
   VLBI RA/Dec [mas]                      Cassini                       2004.69 : 2017.9      0.6
   JPL H14 [m]                            Cassini                       2004.41 : 2014.38     25.0
   Navigation [m]                         Cassini                       2006.01 : 2009.83     6.0
   Radio Science : Titan Flybys [m]       Cassini                       2006.01 : 2016.61     15.0
   Radio Science : Grand Finale) [m]      Cassini                       2017.35 : 2017.55     1.0
   Uranus
   Optical RA/Dec [arcsec]                Transit+CCD+photo             1924.62 : 2013.75     0.25
   Flyby RA/Dec [mas]                     Voyager                       1986.07               50
   Flyby range [m]                        Voyager                       1986.07               50
   Neptune
   Optical RA/Dec [arcsec]                Transit+CCD+photo             1924.04 : 2007.88     0.3
   Flyby RA/Dec [mas]                     Voyager                       1989.65               15.0
   Flyby range [m]                        Voyager                       1989.65               2



3.4 Planetary Datasets

The modern planetary ephemerides are characterised by the role of planet positions

deduced from spacecraft missions either by navigation tracking or by the use of

radio science data. In both cases, it is the distance between a station on the ground
                                   Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


62          CONTENTS

and a spacecraft orbiting of flying over a planet that is used for the construction of

planetary ephemerides. The angular position between the same spacecraft and an

extra-galactic source (generally a reference beacon for the construction of the iner-

tial frame, ICRF) is also of great importance for the adjustment of the planetary

ephemerides as it allows the tie of the planetary planes to the ICRF (see sect. 3.2.3).

Optical meridian transit and CCD angular positions are mainly kept for the constraint

on the outer planet orbits. A full description of the different data sets used for the

construction of the planetary ephemerides can be found in Folkner et al. (2014a) and

Fienga et al. (2009) and regular updates are presented for every new releases such as

for DE440 (Park et al., 2021) or INPOP19a (Di Ruscio et al., 2020b). Table 3 gives

the different data sets used for the construction of INPOP21a (Fienga et al., 2021b),

counting a total of about 200,000 observations, this number of course varying from

one ephemeris to another. Very similar datasets have been used by DE440 (Park et al.,

2021).



3.4.1 Time delay of the propagation of light

The propagation of light is affected by the curvature of spacetime. Although the tra-

jectory of light is bent in gravitational potentials, this bending is negligible for radio

science in the solar system20 , and the main effect is known as the Shapiro delay:

the propagation time between two points is not simply the Euclidean BCRS distance

over the speed of light between an emission point e and a reception point r, but it

also involves a delay in general relativity that depends on the gravitational potentials

as follows (Moyer, 2000)


                                                     X µA n · rrA + rrA + 4µ2A
                                                                              c
                    c(tr − te )GRT = R +              2 2 ln                      ,                     (94)
                                                      A
                                                       c     n · reA + reA + 4µ
                                                                              c2
                                                                                A




  20
       Because it is a second order effect in the post-Newtonian development of the propagation time.
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                 CONTENTS          63

where the R is the Euclidean coordinate distance, n = (rr − re )/∥rr − re ∥,

riA = ri − rA and riA = ∥riA ∥ with i = e or r. Note that Eq. (94) slightly

differs from the actual Shapiro equation through the c−2 terms in the logarithm

function. It has lately been realized that this version of the Shapiro delay—rather

than the usual equation without the additional c−2 terms in the logarithm—allows

to account for the so-called second order time propagation enhanced terms, which

can become numerically significant for particular conjunction situations despite for-

mally being next-to-leading-order (or c−4 ) terms (Ashby and Bertotti, 2010; Linet

and Teyssandier, 2016). In practice, the difference between the two versions of the

Shapiro delay is irrelevant for current planetary ephemerides.

   However, it has been realized during the last decade that for close solar con-

junctions, additional enhanced c−4 terms may no longer be negligeable, in particular

for BepiColombo MORE (Mercury Orbiter radio science Experiment) (Hees et al.,

2014a; Cappuccio et al., 2021) measurements. As a consequence, for close conjunc-

tion events, one might have to go beyond Eq. (94) and use a full second order time

propagation time formula. This will be challenging in many different ways —see

Appendix A. For planetary ephemeris construction, Bepi-Colombo MORE experi-

ment should provide range measurements up to close to 5◦ to the Sun, that is, close

to conjunction (Fienga et al., 2021a). For such close-to-the-Sun observations, a spe-

cific analysis will have to be done in order to account for the neglected terms of Eq.

(94), but in the framework defined by the IAU (harmonic gauge).

   In any case, when one deals with an alternative theory of gravity, one has to take

care of the consistency between the different levels of construction of the ephemeris:

modifying the Shapiro delay or the equation of motion for massive bodies is not

without consequences on the other.
                         Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


64      CONTENTS

3.4.2 Radio science and navigation data

This type of data represent more than 65% of the full data sample used for the con-

struction of the planetary ephemerides. It gathers measurements of distances in terms

of time delays obtained during orbital or flyby phases of space missions, either dur-

ing the regular navigation process, or during specific scientific sessions dedicated to

radio science experiments. In this latter case, a detailed assessment of the capabilities

of the radio transpondeur used for the re-emission of the captured signal is needed

for the analysis (see i.e. Cappuccio et al. (2020)). The measurement is the time dif-

ferences between the time of emission of the signal by a ground-based antenna, the

time of capture by the transponder on board of a spacecraft, the time of re-emission

by this transponder after amplification and the time of reception of the transmitted

signal by the same or a different ground-based antenna. Using a known orbit of the

spacecraft around or near the planet, it is then possible to deduce the planetary range

measurement, by accounting for the distance between the spacecraft and the centre of

mass of the planet estimated during the s/c orbit determination. The accuracy of the

range constraints deduced from the radio science and navigation data is then strongly

dependant on the uncertainties of the spacecraft orbit determination.

     The distribution of the data per missions is given in Fig. 7. In numbers, the Mars

orbiter observations dominate, followed by the Venus tracking data. In terms of accu-

racy, the Mars data also lead the fit together with the less numerous but important

tracking data of the Juno mission orbiting Jupiter as well as the Cassini radio sci-

ence and tracking data for Saturn. The predominance in numbers and accuracy of

the Mars observations on the planetary ephemerides data sample explain why some

tests of general relativity have been said to be driven by the Mars orbit (Will, 2018a),

whereas Bernus et al. (2019) stressed also the importance of the outer planet radio

science experiments.
                                                    Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                                                             CONTENTS             65

                                   Distribution of Radio Science Data                         Distribution of Optical Outer planet Data

                        Ma:MEX
                                                                             Uranus:Itajuba
                        Ve:VEX


                     Ma:MRO/MO
                                                                                    Saturn




S/C tracking/radio
                       Ma:MGS


                        Ma:VKG                                                      Jupiter


                       Me:MSG

                                                                                   Nepune
                      Sa:Cassini


                        Ju:Juno
                                                                                    Uranus
                        UN:VYG

                                    0        10        20        30     40                     0         5        10       15          20
                                                       [%]                                                        [%]

Fig. 7 Example of distribution in percentages of the radio science and tracking data and the optical obser-
vations. On the left-hand side, data samples are identified by planets (Ma stand for Mars, Me for Mercury,
Ve for Venus, Ju for Jupiter, Sa Saturn and UN for Uranus and Neptune) and by missions. On the right-
hand side, the data sample are identified according to the observed planet. A specific tag is made on the set
of astrometric positions obtained by Camargo et al. (2022). The presented datasets correspond to the one
of INPOP21a (see Table 3). Roughly similar distribution is present for DE and EPM ephemerides.



                       Furthermore, in term of gravitational framework, these observations are also

given in the framework used for studying the motion of the spacecraft around the

planet. This framework is usually general relativity and discussions have been held

regarding the consistency of testing alternative theories of gravity with observational

constraints obtained in general relativity (i.e. Verma et al. (2014)). The most simple

way to solve this problem is to operate the spacecraft orbit determination (OD) in

the same framework as the one of the alternative theories to be tested. But as the s/c

navigation is regularly interrupted, even during orbital phases, by engine boosts or

attitude corrections, introducing significant changes in the orbit, OD is usually done

over a short duration of time (from few hours to few days), in between these manoeu-

vres. Most of the time, up to now, alternative theories of gravity start to significantly

differ from general relativity over longer time intervals. But it is clear that with the

increase of the accuracy in the s/c orbit tracking, the modified general relativity that

one wants to test should also be implemented during the OD process. See for example

De Marchi and Cascioli (2020).
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


66      CONTENTS

     In parallel to the radar tracking, navigation teams also acquire positions of the

spacecraft relative to extra-galactic sources by using facilities also dedicated to VLBI

observations. This type of observations, called Delta -DOR, represent less than 1 %

of the full data sample but they are crucial for linking the ephemeris reference frame

to the ICRF (see sect. 3.2.3). The first were obtained in 1981 (Donivan and Newhall,

1981) with the Viking Mars lander. Technical description related to the production of

this type of observations can be found in Folkner et al. (1994) and Moyer (2000). The

most recent planetary ephemerides account for a total of about 300 VLBI positions,

mainly extracted from the tracking data of Mars, Venus, Jupiter and Saturn orbiters

with accuracies about less than 1 milliarcsecond of degree (mas) (Jones et al., 2011,

2019; Park et al., 2021).


3.4.3 Angular ground-based observations

Finally, the observational data base is completed by the optical observations of outer

planets. This set constitutes about 35% of the full data sample, and, despite their

uncertainties, are crucial for Uranus and Neptune. For these two planets, only 1

flyby per planet has been acquired during the Voyager missions, leading to a weak

constraint for several decade-long orbits. Direct transit observations of planets or

satellites are part of the optical data samples as well as astrometric positions deduced

from CCD observations and photographic plates. Both planet and satellite posi-

tions are included. In the case of satellite astrometry, the position of the planetary

barycenter is deduced using satellite ephemerides (i.e. Camargo et al. (2022)). The

long-term (several decades) behaviour of outer planet orbits is then driven by the

planet barycenter equation of motion as given in Eq. (96), but also by the satellite

dynamics. Additionally, depending on the reference frames used for the data publi-

cations, different algorithms are applied for transforming the astrometric positions

(for example given in FK3, FK4 or FK5) to ICRF. Such transformations guarantee,

at the level of accuracy of the optical data (about 50 to 100 mas), the link between
                         Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                 CONTENTS          67

the INPOP outer planet frame and ICRF. VLBI observations enforce this link at the

VLBI accuracy which means a factor of at least 100 compared to the optical tie. On

Fig. 7 are given an example (for INPOP21a) of the percentages of optical observa-

tions per planet. A specific tag is made on the data sample provided by Camargo et al.

(2022) who did a new reduction of astrometric long-term observations of the Ura-

nian main satellites obtained at the Pico dos Dias from 1982 to 2011, using the Gaia

EDR3 as reference.




3.5 Fitting procedures

The main construction of planetary ephemerides uses a classic least squares

approach. The total number of fitted parameters can be found in Table 2. It changes

from one ephemeris to an other, depending the perturbations included in the model

and the observational parametrizations required for the data analysis. Thus, to the

parameters presented in Table 2, spacecraft bias accounting for additional transpon-

deur delays or additional ground-station delays (Kuchynka et al., 2012) have also

to be added as well as parameters related to solar plasma corrections (Verma et al.,

2013; Pitjeva et al., 2021).

Complementary methods have been proposed to make accuracy assessments, to over-

come the problems of high correlated parameters, in particular in the frame of testing

alternative theories of gravity (see sect 4.1), or of multiple correlations between

parameters, as in the case of the determination of asteroid masses (Fienga et al.,

2020a). In the context of computing threshold values for the violation of general rel-

ativity, Fienga et al. (2015) had tested genetic algorithm approaches for identifying

sets of parameters (PPN β , γ , the Sun oblateness J⊙
                                                    2 and secular variations of the

gravitational mass of the Sun, µ̇/µ) with which planetary ephemerides can be com-

puted and fitted to the observations with an comparable accuracy to the ephemeris

(in this case INPOP15a) built in general relativity. Different approaches based on χ2
                                    Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


68          CONTENTS

analysis with fixed PPN or alternative theory parameters have been investigated as

well, using random walk exploration methods associated with various cost functions

(Bernus et al., 2019, 2020, 2022; Fienga et al., 2021a). These methods have in com-

mon to be very conservative and to give larger constraints than those obtained with

the least square procedures. See sect. 4.1 for the full discussion.


A final but important comment is about the masses used for the construction of

the ephemerides.

Most of the planetary masses are not obtained during the construction of the plan-

etary ephemerides but during the orbit determination of one or several spacecraft

flying in planetary systems (see Table 4). They are obtained by combination of data

from different missions and techniques, usually in the general relativity framework.

For example, in the case of Neptune and Uranus, it is even a combination of Voy-

ager radio tracking data, ground-based optical observations and images acquired by

the s/c that leads to the determination of the mass of the planetary system. The s/c

orbit and gravity field (mass) determinations are complex as they depend on various

sources of interactions from solar radiation pressure, atmospheric dragging, maneu-

ver residual accelerations to non-stochastic accelerations. For that reason, these s/c

orbit and gravity field determinations are usually done independently from the plane-

tary ephemerides.21 These masses are therefore obtained in the framework of the s/c

orbit and of the gravity field determination algorithm, which assumes generally gen-

eral relativity. Only, the gravitational mass of the Sun, the ratio between the mass of

the Earth and the mass of the Moon (invariant to any change of the gravitational con-

stant) as well as a variable number of asteroid gravitational masses (see sect. 3.3.2)

are, in fact, estimated during the planetary ephemeris adjustment. In the case of a test

of the violation of the Equivalence principle, the fact that some of the masses used

in the ephemeris are obtained in the general relativity framework can introduce an

  21
       Even if iterations are sometimes necessary.
                            Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                            CONTENTS             69

Table 4 Planetary masses used in DE440 (Park et al., 2021) and INPOP19a (Fienga et al., 2021b). Are
indicated from which missions the masses were extracted from with the corresponding references.
        Planet          References                 Mission
       Mercury          Konopliv et al. (2020)     Messsenger
        Venus           Konopliv et al. (1999)     MAGELLAN
        Mars            Konopliv et al. (2016)     MRO, MGS, Odyssey,
                                                   Pathfinder, MER, Viking
  Jupiter barycenter    Durante et al. (2020)      Juno + 5 s/c flybys +
                        Jacobson (2021b)           ground-based and s/c optical data
  Saturn barycenter     Jacobson (2021a)           Cassini + ground-based +
                        Di Ruscio et al. (2020a)   s/c optical data
 Uranus barycenter      Jacobson (2014)            Voyager 2 + ground-based optical data
 Neptune barycenter     Jacobson (2009)            Voyager + ground-based and s/c optical data


inconsistency in the method. In principle, it should be necessary to consider a more

global approach, including the s/c orbit determination in the same framework than

the one of the planetary ephemeris. So far, such an attempt was only operated for

Parametrized post-Newtonian tests (see sect. 4.1).


4 Tests of alternative theoretical frameworks with
    planetary ephemeris

Thanks to the accuracy of the most recent observations but also to the more than

one century long data span, planetary ephemerides are excellent tools for testing

general relativity and its alternatives. In principle, if the model of gravity is not accu-

rate enough, or does not well represent the physics as seen by the observations, it

should then lead to a deterioration of the differences (residuals) between observed

and computed quantities—deduced from the ephemeris. When the deterioration of

residuals built with an alternative theory becomes statistically significant with respect

to the residuals obtained in the general relativity framework, one can say that it

disfavors the alternative theoretical framework—or favors general relativity over its

alternative. On the opposite, if the residuals obtained with an alternative theory are

significantly improved—that is, if there are significantly smaller—in comparison to

the one obtained in the general relativity framework, it favors the alternative theory.

However, so far, this has never occurred.
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


70      CONTENTS

     In the following sections, we will explore various theories or phenomenologies

that have been scrutinized using planetary ephemerides. The selection of certain

theories or phenomenologies to test, rather than others, can be driven by several

considerations. One of them could be the historical circumstances. For example,

the Parametrized Post-Newtonian (PPN) framework was developed during the early

stages of the general relativity testing era and has since been widely employed in

tests involving planetary ephemerides.

     Another factor could be the complexity of the task, both in terms of numerical

computations and statistical methodology. The larger the number of parameters to

constrain a theory has, the larger the dimension of the theoretical space there is to

examine. Additionally, there is an increasing risk of introducing multiple correla-

tions between the parameters of the theory, as well as between these parameters and

those of the solar system (i.e., masses). Given that it can take up to eight hours of

computation to adjust the solar system parameters of the ephemeris at a single point

in the parameter space (Mariani et al., 2023), achieving a densely filled parameter

space becomes highly computationally demanding if the parameter space dimension

is greater than one. Moreover, the statistical methodology also grows more complex

with an increase in the number of parameters to constrain.

     There is also the risk of missing a genuine detection—that is, obtaining better

residuals in an alternative theory than in general relativity for a specific parameter

value—if the parameter space of alternative theories explored is too sparsely pop-

ulated. Therefore, it is of paramount importance to have a densely filled parameter

space, which consequently makes computational time requirements escalate with the

number of parameters to constrain. In the case of a classic least square approach,

the risk of high correlations between parameters associated with the observational

uncertainties also limit the possible theories to be tested. As a result, tests are often

conducted on theories or phenomenologies that hinge on few parameters only.
                                  Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                                             CONTENTS                  71

4.1 Parametrized post-Newtonian framework

For metric theories—that is, theories for which the additional gravitational fields22

do not couple to matter directly, such that the theories satisfy the weak equivalence

principle by design—all the differences with respect to general relativity can be taken

into account through parameters that appear in front of the gravitational potentials

in the metric (Will, 2014, 2018b). Indeed, because the weak equivalence principle is

enforced by hand by imposing that the additional gravitational fields do not couple

to matter directly, particles still follow geodesics of the metric and proper time is still

defined from the metric only.23

       Many theories then turn out to generate the same type of metrics, where the dif-

ferences with respect to general relativity can be parametrized by a set of a few

parameters in the metric only—which values depend upon the theory considered.

This comes in handy, as it allows to derive all the equations necessary in plane-

tary ephemerides—that are, the time-scale definitions, the motion of celestial bodies

and the Shapiro delay—from a single original parametrized metric. This whole

framework is therefore called the parametrized post-Newtonian (PPN) formalism.

       Nevertheless, as it will be discussed in Sec 4.1.2, the coordinate system being

used for planetary ephemerides matters, and one has to make sure that the coordi-

nate system being used for alternative theories is compatible at the required level of

accuracy with the IAU standards used to convert observables (e.g. the roundtrip of

an electromagnetic signal measured in terms of the proper time of the local clock)

into spatial and temporal coordinate positions (e.g. the distance24 of a spacecraft with

respect to the ground-based station being used).



  22
      Sometimes called “degrees of freedom” in the theoretical literature.
  23
      Technically, a theory satisfies the weak equivalence principle if it exists a conformal (or disformal) representation
for which the metric is the only gravitational field that appears in the matter Lagragian density according to the comma-
goes-to-semicolon rule (Misner et al., 1973). For instance, the additional scalar-field appears in the matter Lagrangian
density in the Brans-Dicke theory when written in the Einstein representation (or frame), but not in the (original) Jordan
representation. Hence, because of the latter, the Brans-Dicke theory satisfies the weak equivalence principle.
   24
      Which is dependent upon the coordinate system being used.
                               Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


72       CONTENTS

Table 5 PPN parameters β and γ obtained with planetary ephemerides. Columns 1,2 and 3 give
respectively the reference, the ephemeris involved and method used. As explained in the text (sect. 4.1),
we consider a classification based on 3 types of adjustment methods: the direct least square fit combining
β , γ , all the ephemeris parameters and the oblateness of the Sun, J⊙2 (FF), the partial fit where some
parameters are fixed such as γ or J⊙2 and the other are fitted (PF), the random walk exploration (RW)
where β and γ are randomly sampled when the rest of the parameters (including J⊙      2 ) are fitted. Are given
for information the results obtained in considering only the Mercury orbit (MSG).

 Reference                      PE              Method      β−1              γ−1               J⊙
                                                                                                2
                                                            × 105            × 105             × 107
 (Pitjeva, 2001)                EPM2000         FF          40 ± 20∗         10 ± 10∗          2.43 ± 0.67∗
 (Standish, 2001)               DE405           FF          10 ± 10 ∗        40 ± 10∗          2.46 ± 0.68∗
 (Pitjeva, 2005b)               EPM2004         FF          0 ± 10 ∗         -10 ± 20 ∗        1.9 ± 0.3
 (Fienga et al., 2009)          INPOP08a        PF          7.5 ± 12.5       0.0               fixed to 1.82
 (Fienga et al., 2011a)         INPOP10a        PF          -4.1 ± 7.8       -6.2 ± 8.1        fixed to 2.40
 (Konopliv et al., 2011)        DE421           PF          4 ± 24           fixed to 2.1      fixed to 1.8
 (Pitjeva and Pitjev, 2013)     EPM2011         FF          -2 ± 3           4±6               2.0 ± 0.20
 (Verma et al., 2014)           INPOP13c        FF          0.2 ± 2.5        -0.3 ± 2.5        2.40 ± 0.20
 (Fienga et al., 2015)          INPOP15a        FF          -6.7 ± 6.9       -0.8 ± 5.7        2.27 ± 0.25
 (Fienga et al., 2015)          INPOP15a        RW          0.00 ± 6.90      -1.55 ± 5.01      2.22 ± 0.13
 (Park et al., 2017)            DE440           PF          -2.6 ± 3.9∗      fixed to 2.1      2.25 ± 0.09∗
 (Genova et al., 2018)          DE438           MSG         -1.625 ± 1.8     fixed to 2.1      2.246 ± 0.02
 (Fienga et al., 2021a)         INPOP20a        PF          1.9 ± 6.28       2.64 ± 3.44       2.165 ± 0.12
  (Fienga et al., 2021a)        INPOP20a        RW          -1.12 ± 7.16     -1.69 ± 7.49      2.206 ± 0.03



     Among the 10 PPN parameters discussed in Will (2014) and Will (2018b), we

shall first only consider the Eddington-Robertson-Schiff parameters γ and β , because

most of the planetary ephemerides to this date focused on those parameters. A com-

plete description of the PPN parameters will be discussed in Sec. 4.1.4. Let us write

the metric as follows (Klioner and Soffel, 2000)




                                           2w 2βw2
                               g00 = − 1 +     − 4 + O(c−5 )
                                           c2       c
                                       (4γ + 3) wi
                               g0i = −            3
                                                    + O(c−4 )
                                         2     c 
                                             2γw
                               gij =δij 1 + 2        + O(c−3 ) ,                                         (95)
                                              c


In general relativity, the PPN parameters β and γ equal to one, but not for alternative

theories in general.

     The form of the metric given in Eq. (95) is not sufficient in order to completely

fix the coordinate system, and one has to impose an additional constraint (or gauge)
                                 Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                                              CONTENTS        73


                     12
                     10
                      8
                      6
                                         E2011
                      4                              I20a
                                         D440
                                                                              Cassini [B03]
                      2



      (γ−1) x 105
                                                MSG             D421
                      0               I15a               I13c
                                                                                              Methods
                                                                       I08a
                                                                                                Full Fit
                    −2                        I20a       I15a                                   RW
                    −4                                                                          Partial Fit

                    −6
                                       I10a
                    −8
                    −10
                    −12
                    −14
                    −16
                          −15   −10    −5            0           5        10          15
                                                                 5
                                         (β−1) x 10
Fig. 8 Constraints on PPN parameters β and γ obtained from planetary ephemerides as presented in Table
5. The shadded area is the zone common to all the constraints. The lightgrey lines give the constraint on γ
extracted from the Cassini experiment (Bertotti et al., 2003b). Three categories are considered: the values
obtained from a full global fit, the one obtained using random walk exploration methods (RW) and finally,
the one constrained either in fixing one of the two parameters (usually γ like in (Konopliv et al., 2011;
Park et al., 2017)) either in considering only one planetary orbit (like the Mercury orbit for Genova et al.
(2018) . These categories were labelled according to the Column 3 of Table 5 and the annotated text refers
to Column 2 of Table 5.




in order to specify the metric field equations—see, e.g., Klioner and Soffel (2000).

Since the IAU recommends the coordinates (or gauge) to be harmonic for general

relativity (Soffel, 2003), it seems relevant to consider harmonic coordinates for alter-

native theories as well, such that (at least) the coordinate systems of the alternative

theory reduce to the IAU coordinate systems in the limit for which both theories

cannot be distinguished at the level of accuracy of the observations.
                                  Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


74        CONTENTS

Ambiguity of the definition of harmonic coordinates

The very definition of what one may call harmonic coordinates can be ambigu-

ous for alternative theories of gravity. For instance, for scalar-tensor theories, one

can impose the usual post-Newtonian harmonic conditions—g αβ Γ0αβ = 0—either

in the Jordan frame, or in the conformal Einstein frame (Damour and Esposito-

Farese, 1992; Kopeikin and Vlasov, 2004; Minazzoli and Chauvineau, 2011; Will,

2018b; Kopeikin, 2019). But both choices reduce to the general relativity harmonic

coordinate in the limit for which the difference between general relativity and the

scalar-tensor theory becomes negligeable (e.g. for the Brans-Dicke parameter that

is such that ω → ∞). Imposing the harmonic conditions in the Einstein frame has

been shown to lead to more convenient properties (Damour and Esposito-Farese,

1992; Kopeikin and Vlasov, 2004; Minazzoli and Chauvineau, 2011; Kopeikin,

2019), notably with respect to the full theory of reference frames (Kopeikin and

Vlasov, 2004). However, this definition of harmonic coordinates then becomes

theory-dependent (Will, 2018b). In order to alleviate the ambiguity, Kopeikin and

Vlasov (2004); Kopeikin (2019) used the name “Nutku gauge”—or “conformal har-

monic gauge”—when the harmonic conditions are imposed on the metric in the

Einstein frame rather than in the Jordan frame. In (Will, 2018b), it corresponds to the

“generalized harmonic gauge”.


4.1.1 Equations of motion, Lense-Thirring and Shapiro delay

In harmonic coordinates, the EIHDL equation of motion in the barycentric frame (Eq.

90) reads as follows25


                  X µA
aP
 T
   PN
      =−                  3    rAT
                         rAT
                 A̸=T


   25
      However, the transformations between the barycentric and geocentric reference frames slightly depend on the specific
type of harmonic coordinates being used Kopeikin and Vlasov (2004).
                          Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                     CONTENTS          75
                               (                                                          2
              X       µA         2           2                    3              rAT .vA
          −           3 c2 rAT γvT + (γ + 1)vA − 2(1 + γ)vA .vT − 2
                     rAT                                                          rAT
              A̸=T
                                                                                                )
                                      1                   X µB              X µB
                                     − rAT .aA − 2(γ + β)        − (2β − 1)
                                      2                     rT B              rAB
                                                              B̸=T                  B̸=A
              X        µA
          +              3  [2(1 + γ)rAT .vT − (1 + 2γ)rAT .vA ] (vT − vA )
                     c2 rAT
              A̸=T
              3 + 4γ X µA
          +                  aA ,                                                     (96)
                 2    c2 rAT
                       A̸=T



with γ and β , the Parametrized Post Newtonian (PPN) parameters. They are equal to

1 in general relativity, such that one recovers the usual EIHDL Eq. (90) in that case.

Additionally, directly from the metric Eq. (95), one can deduce that the Shapiro delay

becomes

                                                                       (1+γ)µ
                               X               µA n · rrA + rrA + 2 c2 A
     c(tr − te )P P N = R +          (γ + 1)      ln                           ,      (97)
                                               c2    n · reA + reA + 2 (1+γ)µ
                                                                           2
                                                                             A
                                 A                                       c


with the same notations as Eq. (94).

   The Lense-Thirring acceleration is also modified and reads:

                                                                
                                     GS 3k.r
                     aP
                      LT
                        PN
                           = (1 + γ)            (r ∧ v) − (k ∧ v)                     (98)
                                     c2 r3   r2


with the notation of Eq. (91).

   It is also important to stress that only the PPN parameter γ appears in the Shapiro

delay formula that is used for the computation of the propagation time of light and

doppler shift (see sect. 3.4). As a consequence, the impact of this parameter can

be more easily disentangled from the effect of other parameters, in particular with

conjunction events for which one directly probes the differential evolution of Eq. (97)

with respect to evolution of the impact parameter during the conjunction (Bertotti
                                  Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


76       CONTENTS


                                            F      P      RW            N     Y


                            E00


                            E04


                            E11


                           D405



              References
                           I13c


                           I15a


                           D440


                           I20a


                           G18

                                  1.5            2.0              2.5               3.0
                                                Sun J2 x107 in PPN
Fig. 9 Values of the Sun oblateness J2⊙ obtained when considering PPN parameters β and γ as varying
parameters. The dotted lines give the limits of the less constraining helioseismologic value from (Pijpers,
1998). F stands for Full fit, RW for random walk exploration method and P for partially fitted ephemerides
(some parameters are fixed). N (respectively Y) indicates that the value has been obtained without (respec-
tively with) LT. In y-axis, are given the references : G18 is (Genova et al., 2018), I20a (Fienga et al.,
2021a), D440 (Park et al., 2017), I13c (Fienga et al., 2014), E04 and E11 in (Pitjeva and Pitjev, 2013).
E00 is (Pitjeva, 2001), D405 (Standish, 2001) and I15a (Fienga et al., 2015). It is important to note that in
Genova et al. (2018), only the orbit of Mercury is considered.




et al., 2003b). This disentangling of the γ parameter is also enhanced by the LT

contribution, which depends on γ .

     Since the first radar echos obtained from the Mercury surface (Shapiro, 1964),

it has been possible to evaluate the departure from unity of the PPN parameters in

the context of the planetary orbit computation. Such estimations are done during the

construction of the planetary ephemerides when the initial conditions of the plane-

tary orbits are fitted to observations with a least square procedure (Ash et al., 1967;

Standish et al., 1976), together with other parameters such asteroid masses.
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                 CONTENTS          77

4.1.2 Time-scales

As mentioned in Sec. 3.2.2, planetary ephemerides produce the difference between

the TT and the TDB. In the PPN framework, Eq. (86) has to be modified as follows

(Manche, 2011)


     1      X µA
a = − vT2 −
     2        rAT
               A̸=T
                                       2           (
                       
     1          1               X µA          X µA                          1
b = − vT4 + β −                         +            2(1 + γ)vT .vA − (γ + )vT2
     8          2                 rAT     rAT                               2
                      A̸=T          A̸=T
                                        2 )
              2  1          1   vA .r AT
    − (1 + γ)vA + aA .rAT +
                 2          2     rAT
                               
               X µA      X µB
    + (2β − 1)                 .                                               (99)
                  rAT       rBA
                 A̸=T           B̸=A



Comments on reference frame theory in alternative theories

The difficult subject of reference frame systems in alternative theories has not been

investigated systematically. In fact, it has been explored explicitly only for a class

of massless scalar-tensor theories “à la Brans-Dicke” (Kopeikin and Vlasov, 2004),

after some previous effort to characterize it in a general standard post-Newtonian

approach (Klioner and Soffel, 2000). Fortunately in practice, the differences between

coordinate systems in general relativity versus PPN framework are numerically

negligible—notably given the already tight constraints that one already has on the

PPN parameters.



4.1.3 Constraints and correlations

An important discussion related to the PPN parameter determinations using least

square methods is the correlations between β , γ and other contributions to the plan-

etary accelerations. This problem has been pointed out a long time ago (Anderson
                         Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


78      CONTENTS

et al., 1978) but it is still vivid today. In particular, if we consider the analytical

expression of the advance of the perihelia for planetary orbits ∆ϖ̇P LA , as given in

(Will, 2014), the two main contributions of this equation are the PPN term (2+2γ−β)

and a term giving the impact of the Sun oblateness J2⊙ . But we can also add the main

belt asteroid contribution and the LT effect defined in sect. 3.3.3, such as per orbit,

one gets (Bertotti et al., 2003a)



                                                          
                            2 (2γ − β + 2)
        ∆ϖ̇P LA =µ⊙ (t) ×                   + ∆ϖ̇LT (S, γ)
                            3 a (1 − e2 )c2
                              2
                            R⊙
                 + J2⊙ 2             + ∆ϖ̇AST (µAST , aAST , eAST )                (100)
                        a (1 − e2 )2


where aAST , eAST , µAST are respectively the asteroid orbit semi-major axis and

eccentricity and its gravitational mass perturbing the planet orbits (main-belt and

trans-neptunian objects), a, e are the semi-major axis and eccentricity of the planet

orbit and finally, c and µ⊙ are the speed of light and the gravitational parameter of the

Sun. This latest quantity can be time-varying as discussed in sect. 4.3.∆ϖ̇LT (S, γ)

is the Lense-Thirring effect presented in sect. 3.3.3. A discussion about other con-

tributing terms such as PN cross-terms, de Sitter precession and 2PN crossterms has

been proposed by Will (2018). The conclusion is that these 3 additional contributions

could have some importances in the coming years with the Bepi-Colombo mission.

In any case, they are implicitely taken into account when numerically integrating the

EIHDL equation of motion.

     Note that Eq. (100) is an analytical approximation of the perihelia advance rate

that is useful in order to get a sense of some of the correlations that may arise between

different quantities. The actual value would have to be inferred from the numerical

integration of the equations of motion in the solar system with the total acceleration,
                         Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                    CONTENTS            79

atotal
 T :




           atotal
            T     = aT (µSS , γ, β, ICSS ) + aJ ⊙ (µ⊙ , J2⊙ ) + aLT (S⊙ , γ),        (101)
                                                  2




where aT , aJ ⊙ , aLT are the point-mass interaction acceleration given in Eq. (96),
              2

the acceleration induced by the oblateness of the Sun Eq. (92) and the Lense-Thirring

acceleration Eq. (98) respectively, ICSS stands for the initial conditions of the

numerical integration for the solar system bodies, including asteroids.

    It is rather understandable from Eq. (100) that there can be some level of corre-

lation between, e.g., the semi-major axis (which follows from the initial conditions

in the numerical integration) and the post-Newtonian parameters γ and β . One can

also see that for disentangling the different contributions, it is more efficient to have

several orbits with significantly different semi-major axis a and eccentricities e as

the PPN acceleration depends on a when the Sun oblateness acceleration depends

on a2 (see Eq. (100) and (93)). It is also interesting to compare the Sun J2⊙ deter-

minations obtained in general relativity—equivalent to consider β and γ fixed to

one—presented on Fig. 6 with the those obtained in adding the PPN parameters β

and γ into the global planetary fit as on Fig 9. It appears first that, besides the differ-

ences between ephemerides, the general relativity estimations (with β and γ fixed to

unity) have globally reduced error bars (i.e. less uncertainty induced by less correla-

tion), as one can see, for example, with INPOP20a (2.218 ± 0.03 in general relativity

versus 2.165 ± 0.12 in PPN), or the partial fit obtained by Genova et al. (2018)

(2.271 ± 0.003 in general relativity versus 2.246 ± 0.02 in PPN). Secondly, biases

affect also the J2⊙ determinations obtained with fitted PPN parameters as these latest

can be significantly different from the J2⊙ values obtained in general relativity. These

bias are due to the correlations between the PPN parameters and J2⊙ . In the case of
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


80      CONTENTS

the Earth-Moon system, the relation is even more complex as it also includes the tidal

contributions depending on the internal structures of the two bodies.

     In order to overcome the problem of the correlations between the parameters,

other methods of inversion such as random walk exploration or Genetic Algorithm

have been proposed (see sect. 3.5). They usually give more conservative constraints

than the direct least square method as it is visible on Table 5 and Fig. 8. On these

Table and Figure, one can find the estimations of PPN parameters β and γ determina-

tions based on planetary ephemerides. Three families of determinations are proposed.

The first noted F F gathers least square fitted evaluations of PPN parameters, J2⊙

and secular variation of the gravitational parameter of the Sun, µ⊙ . As discussed

previously on Sec. 3.3.4 and 3.5, these parameters are strongly correlated and thus

are affected by biases (see Fig. 6 and 9) and underestimated uncertainties. The sec-

ond type of determinations given on Table 5 with the label P F are the one deduced

with one (at least) of these parameters fixed in the planetary ephemeris adjustment.

These estimations are less correlated than the F F ones and give more reliable assess-

ments but are limited to only one value (usually either γ or J2⊙ are fixed and β is

fitted). Finally, the latest category is obtained by Genetic Algorithm (Fienga et al.,

2015) or random walk exploration (Fienga et al., 2021a). They investigate the space

of parameters more largely than the two former methods, leading to usually larger

intervals for possible general relativity violations. On Table 5, values obtained in

the context of one single planet analysis (Mercury) with only one single spacecraft

(MESSENGER) data analysis (Genova et al., 2018) are also given for comparisons.

The obtained results show smaller uncertainties than the planetary determinations

but might be affected by possible biases. As it was shown in the Eq. (100), the use

of multiple orbits favors the disentangling of the different planetary contributions.

Moreover, the value of β is obtained in introducing the Nordvedt relation Eq. (126) in

the equation of motion and in the fitting procedure which supposes to consider only
                                  Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                                            CONTENTS                  81

metric theories and increases the correlations between the fitted parameters (see sect.

4.2).

     Finally, as one can see on Fig. 8, all the PPN estimations obtained with the three

methods are consistent with general relativity, with no significant departure from

unity for β and γ . By considering the common overlaps of all the recently pub-

lished intervals obtained with planetary ephemerides, the two following constraints

are obtained:


                                   (β − 1) = (−0.45 ± 1.75) × 10−5

                                   (γ − 1) = (0.55 ± 1.35) × 10−5

                                                                                                                  (102)


 These values represent an improvement of about 3 orders of magnitude for γ and

β in comparison to the historic first determination of (Anderson et al., 1978). We

can expect the same type of improvements in the coming years, especially with the

outcomes of the Bepi-Colombo mission (Imperi et al., 2018; De Marchi and Cascioli,

2020).


4.1.4 The extended PPN formalism

SPN gauge versus harmonic gauge

Usually, the extended standard post-Newtonian formalism assumes a gauge (or coor-

dinate system) that is quite different from the one recommended by the IAU that is

called the standard post-Newtonian (SPN) gauge. In general relativity already, while

the harmonic condition26 at the post-Newtonian level reads


                                              g αβ Γ0αβ = O(c−5 ),                                                (103)

  26
     On top of the strong isotropy condition imposed on the metric, which fixes the space coordinate (Damour et al., 1991;
Soffel, 2003)—see Sec. 2.1.7
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


82     CONTENTS

the SPN conditions read (Damour et al., 1991)


                                  1
                          ∂j g0j − ∂0 gjj = O(c−5 ),                               (104)
                                  2
                                  1
                          ∂j gij − ∂i (gjj − g00 ) = O(c−4 ).                      (105)
                                  2


It implies that the field equations are modified, such that, instead of Eqs. (81-82), one

has (Damour et al., 1991)


                     ∆wSPN = −4πGσ + O(c−4 ),                                      (106)
                             1
                     ∆wiSPN − ∂t ∂i wSPN = −4πGσ i + O(c−2 ).                      (107)
                             4


The difference between the potentials in the harmonic and the SPN gauges reads

(Soffel, 2003)


        wSPN = w + c−2 ∂tt
                        2
                           χ/2 + O(c−3 ),                           2
                                                      wiSPN = wi − ∂ti χ/8,        (108)


with
                                   Z
                          χ := G       d3 x′ σ (t, x′ ) ∥x − x′ ∥.                 (109)

In terms of coordinates, the transformation between the two coordinate systems reads

(Klioner and Soffel, 2000; Will, 2018b)


                                           1
                                 tSPN = t − ∂t χ,                                  (110)
                                           2
                                           xSPN = x.                               (111)


While both gauges can be used in principle, the harmonic gauge has been found to

be much more convenient for deriving the reference frame theory in the solar system

(Damour et al., 1991), such that harmonic coordinates have been used in the reference
                              Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                                  CONTENTS               83

frame theory upon which the IAU recommendations have been built. A thorough

comparison between the two coordinate systems in the full PPN framework can be

found in (Will, 2018b).

Full PPN metric in harmonic gauge

The full PPN framework considers all the possible different potentials that could con-

tribute to the metric, assuming that the Newtonian potential is the leading potential

—which may not be the case for a massive gravity theory for instance, see sect. 4.4.

Furthermore, the PPN framework can only deal with theories for which the Weak

Equivalence Principle has been enforced by hand by requiring that the additional

gravitational fields do not appear in the material part of the action. In the PPN frame-

work, test particles indeed follow the geodesics of space-time, meaning that matter

reacts to the space-time metric only. While this is necessary in order to have a theory

for which all test particles fall alike by construction, one could question the theoreti-

cal relevance of such a restriction (Damour, 2012)—see Weak Equivalence Principle

in sect. 4.2.

       The full PPN metric in harmonic coordinates27 reads (Will, 2018b):

                                                          
                                              1
          g00 = −1 + 2U + 2ψHarm − 2βU 2 + 1 − α1 + α2 + 2ξ Ẍ +
                                       
                                              2
                +ΦPF
                   Harm ,                                                                             (112)
                              
                            1       1
          g0j = − 2(1 + γ) + α1 Vj − α1 X,0j + ΦPF
                                                jHarm ,                                               (113)
                            2       4
          gjk = (1 + 2γU )δjk                                                                         (114)


with


                    1
         ψHarm =      (2γ + 1 − 2ξ)Φ1 − (2β − 1 − ξ)Φ2 + Φ3 + (3γ − 2ξ)Φ4 +
                    2
                                                                    √                       √
  27
     Defined here as a “Nutku gauge”, that is ∂ν [(1 + (1 + γ)U ) −gg µν ] = 0, and not ∂ν [ −gg µν ] = 0—see
discussion on the ambiguity of the definition of harmonic coordinates in Sec. 4.1.
                                 Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


84        CONTENTS

                      +ξΦ6 − ξΦW ,                                                                               (115)
                                                                                                  
                                                      1
       ΦPF           2        j         j k                j
         Harm = −α1 w U − α1 w Vj + α2 w w Xjk − 2α2 − α1 w X,0j ,(116)
                                                      2
                 1         1
      ΦPF              j         k
       j Harm = − α1 w U + α1 w Xjk ,                            (117)
                 2         4


     where w is the coordinate velocity of the PPN coordinate system relative to the

mean rest frame of the universe, and with the following metric potentials


                       ρ′∗                             ρ′∗ vj′
               Z                                  Z                          Z
        U=                    d3 x′ , Vj =                       d 3 ′
                                                                    x  , X =    ρ′∗ ∥x − x′ ∥d3 x′ ,
                                                                                                 (118)
                    ∥x − x′ ∥                       ∥x − x′ ∥
                                                                             2
                 ρ′∗ v ′2 3 ′
                                                     Z ′∗ ′
                                                         ρ [v · (x − x′ )] 3 ′
                Z
        Φ1 =               d x,                Φ6 =                            d x,              (119)
                ∥x − x′ ∥                                      ∥x − x′ ∥3
                 ρ′∗ U ′ 3 ′                                ρ′∗ Π′ 3 ′
             Z                                       Z
        Φ2 =               d x,                Φ3 =                   d x,                       (120)
                ∥x − x′ ∥                                ∥x − x′ ∥
                       p′
               Z
          Φ4 =               d3 x′ ,                                                                             (121)
                  ∥x − x′ ∥
                                        ′
                          (x − x′ )     (x − x′′ )   (x − x′′ )
              Z                                                 
        ΦW = ρ∗′ ρ∗′′                ·             −              d3 x′ d3 x′′ ,                                 (122)
                         ∥x − x′ ∥3     ∥x − x′′ ∥ ∥x′ − x′′ ∥

               √
where ρ∗ := ρu0 −g is the “conserved” mass density28 —in the sense that it sat-

isfies the Newtonian conservation equation ∂t ρ∗ + ∂j (ρ∗ v j ) = 0. 29 The whole set

of PPN parameters is γ, β, ξ, α1 , α2 , α3 , ζ1 , ζ2 , ζ3 , ζ4 . The parameter ξ is non-zero in

any theory of gravity that predicts preferred-location effects such as a galaxy-induced

anisotropy in the local gravitational constant GL (also called “Whitehead” effects);

α1 , α2 , α3 measure whether or not the theory predicts post-Newtonian preferred-

frame effects; α3 , ζ1 , ζ2 , ζ3 , ζ4 measure whether or not the theory predicts violations

of global conservation laws for total momentum (Will, 2014).

     Untill now, the full PPN framework has not been investigated with planetary

ephemerides. First, one would have to derive the equation of motion in harmonic


  28
     ρ is the density of rest mass of a fluid element as measured in a local, freely falling, momentarily comoving frame.
One has ρ = σ + O(c−2 ), where σ is defined in Eq. (83).
  29
     Note that one therefore has X = χ + O(c−2 ).
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                  CONTENTS           85

coordinates for point-mass interations that follows from the more general hydrody-

namical situation depicted in Eqs. (112-122). Also, let us stress that the issue of the

definition of the SSB has to be carefully checked, notably for the parameters that cor-

respond to a violation of the conservation laws of momentum. Finally, the more the

parameters, the more computationally demanding the study is, and one therefore has

to think about the best way(s) to explore and constrain the landscape of parameters.

Hence, several studies still seem to be needed before being able to constrain the full

PPN framework with planetary ephemerides.

   Nevertheless, measurements of PPN parameters other than β and γ such as

α1 , α2 , ζ1 ,in the weak field regime, have been proposed early, by Anderson et al.

(1978), and in the context of the mission Bepi-Colombo by Milani et al. (2002); De

Marchi and Cascioli (2020), using Mercury orbit. As explained in (Will, 2014), the

contribution of the preferred-frame parameters are included in the ratio between the

planet mass and the Sun mass, leading to contributions to a maximum of 1×10−4 for

Jupiter and 1×10−7 for Mercury. De Marchi and Cascioli (2020) expect a constraint

for α1 at the level of 10−7 and up to 7 ×10−8 for α2 , with Bepi-Colombo and future

Venus missions. These estimations are obtained with covariance analysis of tracking

observations of s/c orbiting planets. They are interesting as they estimate the capabil-

ities of future missions for disentangling of the PPN contributions on the planetary

motions.

   In the strong field regime, constraints have been obtained for the parameters

α1 , α3 and ζ2 using pulsar timing (Stairs, 2003).




4.2 Equivalence principle

While a deviation for particles with different compositions falling equally in a given

gravitational field would indicate a violation of the Weak Equivalence Principle

(WEP), a deviation for extended bodies with different gravitational self-energies
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


86      CONTENTS

would be a sign of a violation of the Gravitational Weak Equivalence Principle

(GWEP), which is part of the Strong Equivalence Principle (SEP) as defined in (Will,

2018b). In all cases, with planetary ephemerides, one seeks to check the Universality

of Free Fall (UFF)—that is, to check whether or not all bodies fall alike in a given

gravitational potential. Such violations naturally occur in various modifications of

general relativity, and in particular in theories with more than four dimensions like

in string theories (Damour and Polyakov, 1994; Damour et al., 2002), for which the

constants of the standard model of particles turn out to be dynamical entities (Damour

and Donoghue, 2010; Damour, 2012).

     As we will see, the violations of both the WEP and GWEP have in common the

fact that the equation of motion at the Newtonian level reads as follows


                                 X        rAT
                       aT = −          µG
                                        A 3   (1 + δT + δAT ) ,                   (123)
                                          rAT
                                A̸=T

where δT and δAT are coefficients that depend on the composition of the bodies T

and A, for the case of the violation of the WEP only. For the case of the violation

of the GWEP only, δT depends on the ratio between the gravitational and inertial

masses and δAT = 0—such that


                                     mG
                                         
                                               = 1 + δT ,                         (124)
                                     mI    T



where mG and mI are the gravitational and inertial masses respectively. Note that

µG                                                                         G
 A is the gravitational parameter constructed with the gravitational mass mA such

as µG             I          I      I
    A = (1 + δA )µA , where µA := GmA is the gravitational parameter obtained

with the inertial mass mIA . Eq. (123) is the most general equation that still satisfies

Newton’s third law of motion (Viswanathan et al., 2018). As we will see in Sec. 4.6,

one can have both a violation of the WEP and the GWEP at the same time—that is,
                                   Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                                          CONTENTS                 87

δT can depend both on the composition of the body T and on its internal gravitational

energy.

       The equivalence principle is currently tested at different scales: on the one hand

on the laboratory scale for WEP with the torsion balance and MICROSCOPE, and on

the other hand, the astronomical scale for GWEP with LLR 30 and compact objects

— at the level of about 10−13 with torsion balances (Adelberger et al., 2003a), 10−15

with the MICROSCOPE experiment (Touboul et al., 2022) and 10−14 with LLR

(Williams et al., 2012; Viswanathan et al., 2018; Biskupek et al., 2021) .

       The latest LLR results (Biskupek et al., 2021) are more accurate that what can be

achieved with the sensitivity of planetary ephemerides as discussed in (Viswanathan

et al., 2018). We give however a brief overview of the equations at stake below,

mainly in the perspective of the Bepi-Colombo mission that should lead to a sig-

nificant improvement of the sensitivity of planetary ephemerides on the tests of the

equivalence principle.

       Finally, it is interesting to note that constraints on the violation of SEP have been

obtained in strong field regime, mainly using the chronometry of millisecond pulsars.

For a deeper dive into this captivating subject, we direct the reader to (Kramer et al.,

2021; Freire et al., 2012; Voisin et al., 2020).



4.2.1 The case of metric theories

While metric theories satisfy the WEP by design (see Sec. 4.1) , they do not satisfy

the SEP in general—in the sense that bodies with different gravitational self-energies

would not follow the same trajectories in general (Nordtvedt, 1968a,b). This notably

induces that for extended bodies with enough gravitational self-energy such as plan-

ets, the ratio between their gravitational and the inertial masses is no longer one as in

general relativity, but instead depends on the body self-gravitational energy that can

  30
       LLR tests also include a WEP contribution as the Earth and Moon have different compositions (Adelberger, 2001).
                         Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


88      CONTENTS

be approximated for uniformly distributed spherical bodies as follows

                                    SEP
                               mG                    3 GmG
                           
                                                           T
                                           =1+η×             ,                      (125)
                               mI    T               5 c2 RT


where RT is the radius of the astronomical body T and mG
                                                       T is its gravitational mass.

The parameter η , known at the Nordtvedt parameter, quantifies the possible viola-

tion of the SEP and can be fitted together with the rest of the planetary and lunar

ephemeris parameters. In the most generic case, η can be seen as an independent

parameter and be introduced in Eq. (125), common to all the bodies. However, in the

case of the metric theories, it can be related to the PPN parameters such as (Will,

2018b):


                                                     2
                        η = 4(β − 1) − (γ − 1) − α1 − α2 .                          (126)
                                                     3


Although note that only the cases for which α1 = 0 and α2 = 0 have been considered

in planetary ephemerides so far—see Sec. 4.1.4 for a discussion on the extended

parametrized post-Newtonian framework. In principle, the introduction of Eq. (126)

in the global adjustment of planetary ephemerides should increase the correlations

between β , γ , η and the other ephemeris parameters, including J2⊙ (Ashby et al.,

2007). However, simulations for the MORE Bepi-Colombo experiment indicate a

significant improvement of the β , J2⊙ and η correlation (from 0.9 to 0.3) thanks to

the high accuracy of the Mercury-Earth range measurements that should be obtained

(few tens of centimeters) by the mission (Milani et al., 2002; De Marchi et al., 2016;

Imperi et al., 2018; De Marchi and Cascioli, 2020). Finally, recent attempt using

Messenger tracking data leads to a measurement of η at the level of 7 ×10−5 but

this estimation has been done in considering only the Mercury orbit (Genova et al.,

2018). Even in these very favorable conditions, it gives a slightly less restrictive limit
                                  Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                                            CONTENTS                  89

than the latest LLR evaluation from Biskupek et al. (2021) with a deduced η value of

5 ×10−5 .


4.2.2 The case of non-metric theories

As discussed in Sec. 4.1, metric theories satisfy the WEP because the additional

gravitational fields (beyond the metric) do not couple directly to matter. However,

one could question the reason why additional gravitational fields would not couple

to matter. Indeed, at the fundamental level, there does not seem to be any reason to

expect that outcome (Damour, 2012). Moreover, extra-gravitational fields with non-

minimal couplings to matter are ubiquitous in various attempts to unify the whole

set of fundamental interactions in physics—such as in Kaluza-Klein or superstring

theories (Damour, 2012), for instance. Finally, such non-minimal couplings can also

appear from radiative quantum corrections of theories that satisfy the WEP at the

classical level (Armendariz-Picon and Penco, 2012)—whereas the WEP in general

relativity is immune to quantum corrections due to the specific symmetries of gen-

eral relativity (Armendariz-Picon and Penco, 2012). Therefore, it seems that beyond

general relativity, violations of the WEP should be expected at some level—either at

the classical level already, or from quantum corrections to the classical action.


Decoupling mechanisms

Since the equivalence principle is observed to be satisfied with an ever increasing

level of accuracy, non-metric theories need to possess mechanisms that are able to

hide the effects of the additional gravitational fields in the solar system. They are

often called “decoupling” or “screening” mechanisms.31 They can take their roots

from the fact that the additional fields are simply massive enough to propagate over

very short distances only—such as what happens with flux compactification in string

   31
      Note that decoupling and screening mechanisms have been proposed first and foremost for theories that do satisfy
the WEP, often in order to be able to explain the acceleration of the expansion of the universe without impacting with the
well-constrained solar system phenomenology.
                         Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


90     CONTENTS

theory (Douglas and Kachru, 2007)—or from the suppression of the coupling during

the evolution of the universe—such as the Damour-Nordtvedt decoupling mecha-

nism (Damour and Nordtvedt, 1993; Damour and Polyakov, 1994)—or from the

dependence of the effective mass, or coupling, of the additional gravitational field

to the local density—such as the chameleon and symmetron mechanisms (Khoury

and Weltman, 2004; Hinterbichler and Khoury, 2010)—or from non-perturbative

effects—such as the Vainstein mechanism (Vainshtein, 1972; Babichev and Deffayet,

2013)—or simply from exact cancellations in the field equations—such as the intrin-

sic decoupling (Minazzoli and Hees, 2013; Minazzoli and Hees, 2016) that notably

appears in entangled relativity (Arruga et al., 2021).




4.2.3 The equivalence principle in a planet-satellite system

Considering the generic Eq. (123), we can deduce for the couple of the bodies T and

A that the difference between their accelerations toward the Sun S reads

                                                        
                        Gm̄AT            G rST       rSA
        ∆a ≡ aA − aT = − 3      rT A + GmS     3  − 3
                         rT A                rST     rSA
                                                               
                           G rST                 rSA
                       +GmS      3 (δT + δST ) − r 3 (δA + δSA ) ,
                                rST
                                                                                 (127)
                                                  SA



with m̄AT ≡ mG    G                G                G
             A + mT + (δT + δT A )mA + (δA + δT A )mT . For gravitationally

bounded systems like the Earth-Moon system, one can further approximate both dis-

tances appearing in this last term as being approximately equal, such that the relevant

term in order to check a potential violation of the EP through a violation of the

universality of free fall (UFF) is


                                 ∆aUFF ≈ aE ∆ESM                                 (128)
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                           CONTENTS     91

where E , S and M stand for the Earth, the Sun and the Moon respectively, and with


                       ∆ESM = [(δE + δSE ) − (δM + δSM )] .                           (129)


Eq. (128) was introduced in (Williams et al., 2012) for theories that violate the GWEP

only, for which ∆ESM = ∆EM such that


                                       mG                   mG
                                                              
                        ∆EM =                       −                  .              (130)
                                       mI       E           mI    M



In that case, Eq. (128) becomes


                                  ∆aUFF ≈ aE ∆EM ,                                    (131)



4.2.4 The equivalence principle at planetary scale

At planetary scale, Eqs. (128) or (131) are not valid anymore. Indeed, planets are

at different distances from the Sun and EP tests cannot be limited to the differences

between two accelerations. In that case, one has to use the more general Eq. (123)

instead.

   A confusion can occur when defining the SSB because the gravitational param-

eters that appear in the equations of motion are constructed with the gravitational

masses; whereas the gravitational parameters that are used to define the SSB should

be constructed with the inertial masses, as pointed out in Milani et al. (2002) and

Genova et al. (2018)—see also Sec. 4.6. It was an issue in particular for previous

versions of planetary ephemerides, such as Folkner et al. (2008), where the SSB posi-

tions and velocities were estimated at each step of integration with the gravitational

parameters appearing in the equations of motion.
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


92      CONTENTS

     However, as explained in Sec. 3.2.4, in planetary ephemerides such as INPOP08

(Fienga et al., 2008) and the followings, the SSB position and velocity are estimated

once, before integrating the motion of planets, using planetary initial conditions, iner-

tial masses and Eqs. (89) and (88). As explained in Sec. 4.6, Bernus et al. (2022)

have checked with a specific theory that violates both the WEP and the GWEP that

those equations indeed remain the ones that characterize the SSB at the required level

of accuracy for planetary ephemerides—provided that inertial masses are used for

the definitions and not gravitational masses—as originally suggested in Milani et al.

(2002); Genova et al. (2018).



4.2.5 Comment on the mass in the Shapiro delay equation

As soon as the SEP is violated, there is a potential ambiguity about the gravitational

parameter that appears in the Shapiro delay Eq. (97). Indeed, the gravitational param-

eter in the Shapiro delay could either be constructed on the inertial mass, or on the

gravitational mass. As we will see in Sec. 4.6 Eqs. (157-158), one can derive from

first principles that the gravitational parameter that appears in the Shapiro delay is

the one built upon the inertial mass, that is µIA = GmIA = (1 − δA )GmG
                                                                      A , with :


                                                            (1+γ)µ
                              X    µIA n · rrA + rrA + 2 c2 A
          c(tr − te ) = R +            ln
                                    (γ + 1)                          ,             (132)
                                   c2     n · reA + reA + 2 (1+γ)µ A
                          A                                    c2
                                   µG             3 µG
                          X                              
                                     A                 A
                     = R+   (γ + 1) 2 1 − η ×               ×                      (133)
                                   c              5 c2 RA
                                A

                                          n · rrA + rrA + 2 (1+γ)µ
                                                               c2
                                                                  A

                                     ln                               .
                                          n · reA + reA + 2 (1+γ)µ
                                                               c2
                                                                  A




There is a somewhat simple explanation to that. One must recall that the original

Nordtvedt effect was derived for the sum of point particles of (inertial) mass m that

are gravitationally bounded together. The metric is bent by those masses m, and

the sum of all the masses correponds to the inertial mass of the overall body that
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                   CONTENTS         93

is composed from all thoses masses, to lowest order (Nordtvedt, 1968b). Since the

Shapido delay simply derives from the null condition ds2 = 0 for light, the Shapiro

delay must depend on this sum of inertial masses. What the Nordtvedt effect tells

additionally, is that the center of mass of this collection of masses does not follow

the same trajectory as would an inertial mass, but follows the trajectory given by the

following equation instead


                                                  3 µG
                                                              
                              X    rAT
                    aT = −      µG
                                 A 3         1+η×      T
                                                                   .             (134)
                                   rAT            5 c2 RT
                           A̸=T



4.2.6 The issue of time in non-metric theories

The issue with theories that violate the WEP is that they usually also violate the

local position invariance (Uzan, 2011), such that the behaviour of clocks not only

may be modified with respect to general relativity depending on the position in the

gravitational field, but also may depend on the clock composition. Therefore, one

may expect that this should complicate the tests of such theories with planetary

ephemerides, given that positions of astronomical bodies are given in one of the coor-

dinate times recommended by the IAU, and which are perfectly independent of the

composition of the clocks that has been used. Fortunately, the local position invari-

ance is tested to a very high level of accuracy on Earth with various atomic clocks

(Rosenband et al., 2008; Guéna et al., 2012; Leefer et al., 2013; Godun et al., 2014;

Huntemann et al., 2014). Indeed, thanks to the eccentricity of the Earth’s orbit, one

can probe a potential variation of the ratio between the frequencies of atomic clock

with different compositions depending on the variation of the local value of the Sun’s

gravitational field. Because the local position invariance is tested with atomic clocks

at a level of accuracy that is far beyond what is used in space navigation, one can

neglect this potential effect in planetary ephemerides.
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


94      CONTENTS

4.3 Variation of the gravitational constant G

With respect to the subject of the potential variation of constants (Uzan, 2011),

planetary and lunar ephemerides have been mostly used for testing an hypothetical

variation of Newton’s constant G, or a related value, the Astronomical Unit (Hellings

et al., 1983; Anderson et al., 1987, 1989; Pitjeva, 1993).

     Before 2012 and the decision by the International Astronomical Union (Capitaine

et al., 2012) to redefine the Astronomical Unit (AU) as a constant with a fixed value,

the AU was indeed part of the parameters estimated during the construction of plan-

etary ephemerides. The Gauss constant k was fixed (Standish, 2001) and the AU was

estimated from this equation


                               GM⊙ = (AU )3 k 2 /D2                             (135)


where D is the length of the day and GM⊙ is the gravitational parameter of the Sun.

In this context, AU values and its hypothetical time variations have been estimated

with planetary fit by Krasinsky and Brumberg (2004). In the same manner, an esti-

mation of Ġ
          G was also obtained, together with the value of AU. A first test of such

a variation has been initiated by Hellings et al. (1983), using the data obtained with

the Viking mission on Mars. On a regular basis, the planetary ephemerides were then

published with updates for Ġ
                           G based on a global adjustment including also AU and

PPN parameters (Pitjeva, 1993; Standish, 2001; Pitjeva, 2005b). Results are gathered

in Table 6.

     After 2012, the AU has been fixed to 149597870700 m, closing the door to the

estimation of dAU /dt, but leading to a more consistent determination of the gravita-

tional parameter of the Sun, GM⊙ noted µ⊙ , now fitted in planetary ephemerides. As

it is reviewed in Uzan (2011), some theories propose that the gravitational constant

can vary with time. Thus, an hypothetical variation of G in time has been introduced
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                   CONTENTS           95

in the planetary ephemerides, but it is not straightforward since it affects both the

planetary and the Sun gravitational parameters µ. .

   For the planets, because they do not lose or gain mass, the time variation of G

induces a direct variation of the gravitational parameter µP such µ̇P /µP = Ġ/G.

For the Sun, its intrinsic mass loss M˙⊙ has also to be considered. As a consequence,

the following equations are added to the system of equations integrated numerically

during the planetary ephemerides construction


                                  µ̇⊙   Ġ M˙⊙
                                      =   +    ,                                   (136)
                                  µ⊙    G M⊙


where µ⊙ is the gravitational paramater of the Sun and


                                      µ̇P  Ġ
                                          = ,                                      (137)
                                      µP   G


with µP is the gravitational parameter of bodies other than the Sun.



   At each step t of the numerical integration of the planetary equations of motion,

the following quantities are estimated :


                         M⊙ (t) = M⊙ (t0 ) + (t − t0 ) × M˙⊙ ,                     (138)

                         MP (t) = MP ,                                             (139)

                         G(t) = G(t0 ) + (t − t0 ) × Ġ,                           (140)

                         µ(t) = G(t) × M (t),                                      (141)


where t0 is the date of the origin of the planetary ephemeris. Let us note that the grav-

itational parameter µ(t) also appears in the computation of the Shapiro delay (see sect
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


96      CONTENTS

3.4.1). In this case, the value of µ(t), corresponding to the date of the observation, is

computed with Eq. (141) and re-introduced in the Shapiro Eq. (94).

     M⊙ (t0 ) is the mass of the Sun fitted during the construction of the ephemeris,

and G(t0 ) is the Newtonian gravitation constant as defined by the IAU (Luzum et al.,

2011). The effect of the time variation of G being largely induced by the gravitational

parameter of the Sun more that the ones of the planets, one then deduces the value of

Ġ/G by considering its impact of the Sun contribution (Eq. 136) and a fixed value
                             M⊙˙
for the Sun total mass loss, M ⊙
                                 . Pitjeva and Pitjev (2012) have proposed an interval

of values for the total solar mass loss of


                    M˙⊙
                        = (−0.67 ± 0.31) × 10−13         (2σ) yr−1 ,               (142)
                    M⊙


     This estimation considers the mass loss by the Sun, but also the mass gained by

falling materials (comets, asteroids etc...). Pinto et al. (2011) have estimated a mean

mass loss from wind emission of charged particles during the 11-year solar cycle :


                    M˙⊙
                        = (−0.55 ± 0.15) × 10−13         (3σ) yr−1 ,               (143)
                    M⊙


instead of Eq. (142). In 2021, a detailed evaluation of Pitjeva et al. (2021) gives


                   M˙⊙
                       = (−1.105 ± 0.235) × 10−13         (3σ) yr−1 ,              (144)
                   M⊙


This value accounts for the solar wind radiation as well as the accumulation of inter-

planetary dust falling on the Sun together with comets. The authors conclude that the
           ˙
value of M⊙
         M⊙ in Pitjeva and Pitjev (2012) is overestimated

     On Table 6, are gathered the values of µ˙⊙ /µ⊙ obtained by different authors

jointly with PPN parameter estimations as well as the Ġ/G deduced using the value
                         Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                    CONTENTS            97

   M⊙˙
of M⊙
      specified in the same Table. It is important to stress that the correlations

between the PPN parameters, µ˙⊙ /µ⊙ and the other fitted parameters of the plan-

etary ephemerides being non zero (see i.e. Table 6 from Fienga et al. (2015)), the

values given in Table 6 have to be considered as part of a global fit, and consequently

they are planetary ephemeris dependent. Direct adjustments with all parameters fitted

together (Pitjeva and Pitjev, 2013; Pitjeva et al., 2021), partial fits (Konopliv et al.,

2011; Fienga et al., 2021a) but also random walk exploration algorithms have been

used for obtaining constraints on µ˙⊙ /µ⊙ , given in Table 6. As explained in Sect 3.5

and 4.1, the partial fit consists to fix one PPN parameter and then fit µ˙⊙ /µ⊙ together

with the rest of the planetary parameters. The random walk exploration algorithm

fixes the PPN parameters and µ˙⊙ /µ⊙ according to random values, and performs a

regular fit for the rest of the planetary parameters. The obtained ephemerides are then

selected according to different statistical criteria (Fienga et al., 2015, 2021a). The lat-

est two approaches (partial fit and random walk exploration algorithms) give larger

intervals of possible values than the direct fit of all parameters, as one can see in

Table 6.

    One can also mention Ġ/G estimations deduced, not directly from planetary

ephemerides, but from the adjustment of one single planet orbit during the analy-

sis of radar tracking data analysis of one given space mission. This is the case for

example with Mercury and the MESSENGER data operated by Genova et al. (2018),

noted MSG in Table 6. In this work, it has to be stressed that only Mercury orbit

was considered in the analysis. Nevertheless, in all the cases produced in Table 6,

no clear indication of a time variation of G is visible, despite the improvements of

the planetary ephemerides and of the estimation of the solar mass loss (Pitjeva et al.,

2021). Finally, other technics or methods have been used for measuring possible vari-

ations of the gravitational constant, G. One can cite for example, the determination

of Ġ/G deduced from pulsar timing (Stairs, 2003; Zhu et al., 2015; Zhu et al., 2018;
                              Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


98       CONTENTS

Table 6 Values of µ˙⊙ /µ⊙ found in the literature deduced from planetary ephemerides. The Column 3
indicates the type of method used for the estimation: either the full fit (FF), the partial fit (PF) in or the
random walk exploration (RW). See text for details. For Fienga et al. (2021a), PF∗∗ indicates that the
oblateness of the Sun is strongly constrained by helio-seismological value. So this solution cannot be
seen as a free fit but as a partial fit. Analysis of the MESSENGER mission is labeled MSG in Column 3
using only the Mercury orbit. The Ġ/G values are deduced with µ̇/µ and M˙⊙ /M⊙ given in Column 5.
The value of Ġ/G deduced from Pitjeva and Pitjev (2013) is not the one published by the authors but was
obtained in using the same value of M˙⊙ /M⊙ as for Konopliv et al. (2011).
                                                                             M˙⊙
 Reference                     PE             Method      µ˙⊙ /µ⊙            M⊙
                                                                                                Ġ/G
                                                          × 1014 yr−1        × 1014 yr−1        × 1014 yr−1
 Before AU fixed
 Pitjeva (1993)                EPM1988        FF          NA                 NA                 470 ± 470
 Pitjeva (2001)                EPM2000        FF          NA                 NA                 4±8
 Standish (2001)               DE405          FF          NA                 NA                 1±8
 Pitjeva (2005b)               EPM2004        FF          NA                 NA                 -2 ± 5
 After AU fixed
 Konopliv et al. (2011)        DE421          PF          1 ± 16             -9.2 ± 6.1         10.2 ± 22.1∗
 Pitjeva and Pitjev (2012)     EPM2010        FF          -5 ± 4             -6.7 ± 3.1         1.65 ± 8.77
 Pitjeva and Pitjev (2013)     EPM2011        FF          -6.3 ± 6.4         -6.7 ± 3.1         0.4 ± 11.1
 Fienga et al. (2015)          INPOP15a       FF          -5.0 ± 2.9         -9.2 ± 6.1         4.2 ± 9.0
                                              RW          -4.3 ± 7.4         -9.2 ± 6.1         4.9 ± 13.5
 Genova et al. (2018)                         MSG         -6.130 ± 1.47      -10 ± 1            4 ± 7.5
 Pitjeva et al. (2021)         EPM2021        FF          -10.2 ± 1.4        -11.05 ± 2.35      0.85 ± 3.75
 Fienga et al. (2021a)         INPOP20a       PF∗∗        -8.8 ± 2.9         -9.2 ± 6.1         0.4 ± 9.0
                                                                             -11.05 ± 2.35      2.25 ± 5.25
                                              RW          -10.3 ± 22.8       -9.2 ± 6.1         -0.8 ± 28.4


Kramer et al., 2021). The obtained limit is then one order of magnitude greater (i.e.

|Ġ/G| < 0.9 × 10−12 yr−1 from Zhu et al. (2018)) than the one obtained with plan-

etary ephemerides although the gravitational regimes are quite different (strong field

regime for the pulsar measurements and weak field for planetary ephemerides).


4.4 Massive gravity

Unlike in electromagnetism—- like with the Procca theory (de Rham, 2014; Proca,

1936)—-, there is not a unique definition for what massive gravity might entail (de

Rham, 2014). In field theory, massive interactions typically result in a Yukawa sup-

pression of these interactions at the scale of the Compton wavelength. However, due

to its tensorial rather than vectorial nature, this may not necessarily be the case for

a fully consistent theory of massive gravity (de Rham, 2014). Nonetheless, from a

phenomenological perspective, it is possible to test whether a Yukawa suppression of

gravitational potentials occurs within the solar system. Formally, this would lead to
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                    CONTENTS       99

the following modification of the Newtonian potential (Will, 2018a)


                              w = wNewton exp(−r/λg ),                          (145)


which can be developped as Bernus et al. (2019)


                                          1 r2
                                                 
                        w = wNewton    1+             + O(λ−3
                                                           g ),                 (146)
                                          2 λ2g


after a convenient change of coordinate system that absorbs the constant term in the

gravitational potential—which has no impact on the observables.

   As discussed in Sect 4.5, this modification is different from a fifth force, for

which the new potential is an affine function of the Yukawa suppression instead of

a linear function (Fischbach et al., 1992; Will, 2014). Fifth forces usually originate

from the existence of an additional gravitational field that is massive—e.g. a mas-

sive scalar field (Wagoner, 1970; Hees et al., 2018)—rather than considering that the

field equation on the metric perturbation itself has a mass term. Indeed, Eq. (145) is

solution of a massive gravitational potential equation that reads


                                          w
                                ∆w −          = −4πGσ.                          (147)
                                          λ2g


   Obviously, as long as λg is big enough, the gravitational phenomenology in the

Newtonian regime can reduce to the one of general relativity to any given level of

accuracy. Also, if λg is large enough that only the leading order correction in Eq.

(146) has a significant contribution to the metric, one can assume that only the New-

tonian part of the post-Newtonian expansion is modified with respect to the equations

of motion in general relativity Eq. (90).

In that situation, the equation of motion only has one extra term with respect to the
                         Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


100        CONTENTS

usual EIHDL equation Eq. (96) that reads Bernus et al. (2019)


                          λ       1 X µT
                        δaAg =            rAT + O(λ−3
                                                   g ),                         (148)
                                 2λ2g rAT
                                    A̸=T



and further assuming that light still propagates along null geodesics, the Shapiro

delay reads (Bernus et al., 2019)




   c(tr − te ) = c(tr − te )GRT                                                  (149)
                                                                                
                                       2 n · rrA + rrA
                   X µA 1
                 +              ln   b                 + n · (rrA rrA − reA reA )  ,
                        c2 2λ2g          n · reA + reA
                    A



where c(tr − te )GRT corresponds to the general relativity light time given in Eq.

(94), b is the minimal distance between the light path and the central body (here the

Sun). This expression is an approximation at c−2 level, the additional terms induced

by gravitational field mass being negligible relative to the present day accuracy for

commonly admitted λg (with λg > 2.8 × 1012 km (Will, 2018a, 1998)).

    Likewise, from Eq. (146), the difference between a clock A and a BCRS time t

still is
                          dτA       1  2             
                              = 1 − 2 vA  /2 + U (xA ) ,                        (150)
                           dt      c
up to terms of order O(λ−2
                        g c
                           −2
                              ). For instance, assuming a conservative bound of

λg > 2 × 1012 km, the correction to Eq. (150) at the surface of the Earth would be

less than 10−17 (∼ R⊕
                    2
                      /λ2g , where R⊕ is the radius of the Earth) time less than the

contribution of the last term in the bracket of Eq. (150)—that is, far beyond what can

be achieved with present clocks stability (Guena et al., 2012).
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                               CONTENTS           101

   By analogy with standard quantum physics, the Compton length can also be

interpreted in terms of a mass of the graviton mg following the relation:


                                            ℏ
                                    λg =       ,                                (151)
                                           cmg


with ℏ the Planck constant, and c the speed of light. In 2018, Will (2018a) proposed

to use solar system ephemerides to improve the constraints on λg in the Newtonian

limit. The starting point was that a massive gravitational field should lead to a mod-

ification of the perihelion advance of solar system bodies. Hence, based on current

constraints on the perihelion advance of Mars derived from Mars Reconnaissance

Orbiter (MRO) data, Will estimates that the Compton wavelength should be bigger

than (1.4 − 2.7) × 1014 km (resp. mg < (4 − 8) × 10−24 eV/c2 ), depending on

the specific analysis. However, making an estimation from quantities derived from

ephemerides that assumed other theorerical frameworks—here, the perihela advances

per orbit and their uncertainty in either general relativity or PPN frameworks—cannot

account for the fact that the mass of the graviton is correlated to the various param-

eters of the ephemeris (eg. masses, semi-major axes etc.). While a graviton with a

non-zero mass may impact the solar system dynamics, so also does a change of the

various other parameters of the ephemerides. Because of the correlation between mg

(or λg ) and other parameters, any modification induced by a non-null value of mg

may—at least in part—be reabsorbed by the modification of other parameters of the

ephemerides.

   In order to overcome this issue, Bernus et al. (2019, 2020) and Mariani et al.

(2023) have built planetary ephemerides fully developed in the massive gravity

framework of Eq. (145) and fitted over the data sample of INPOP17a , INPOP19a

and INPOP21a respectively. The results of these investigations are given on Table 7.
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


102        CONTENTS

   Bernus et al. (2019, 2020) had used a method of random walk exploration that is

more conservative that the Monte Carlo Markov Chain (MCMC) algorithm used by

Mariani et al. (2023). With the same random walk exploration method, but using the

updated INPOP21a ephemerides, Mariani et al. (2023) obtained a constraint that is 3

times smaller than Bernus et al. (2020). This improvement is induced by the use in

INPOP21a of the latest Juno and Mars orbiter tracking data up to 2020 as well as a

fit of the Moon-Earth system to LLR observations also up to 2020. By improving the

procedure with MCMC, Mariani et al. (2023) was able to push the limit of detection

of the mass of the graviton at a new level, with a constraint at 1.01 × 10−24 eV c−2

(resp. λg ≥ 122.48 × 1013 km) with a 99.7% confidence level.

   It is somewhat interesting to compare these constraints to the ones deduced from

the observation of gravitational waves. Indeed, it is assumed that a massive grav-

itational field that leads to Eq. (147) might also modify the dispersion relation of

gravitational waves as follows (Abbott et al., 2021; Will, 1998)


                                 E 2 = p2 c2 + mg c2 ,                             (152)


where E and p are the energy and momentum of the wave.

   Such a modified dispersion relation causes gravitational waves frequency modes

to propagate at different speeds, leading to an overall modification of the phase

morphology of gravitational waves with respect to the general relativity predictions.

Since the morphology of gravitational wave phase has been consistent with general

relativity so far, it led to severe constraints on the value of mg that are reproduced on

Table 7.

   Even if a massive gravity theory actually leads to both the phenomenological

consequences represented in Eqs. (147) and (152), there is absolutely no reason for
                                    Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                             CONTENTS              103

Table 7 Limits obtained for the Compton length λg in km as defined in Eqs. (148) and (149). Are also
given the corresponding values in term graviton mass mg in eV/c2 . Are also indicated, for comparisons,
the values obtained with INPOP17a (Bernus et al., 2019), INPOP19a (Bernus et al., 2020), and
INPOP21a (Mariani et al., 2023) as well as the estimations for the dynamical mode from Virgo-Ligo
GWTC-1 and GWTC-3 (Abbott et al., 2019, 2021). For INPOP21a, two values at 90% confidence level
(CL) are given : the one indicated in the column RW corresponds to value obtained with the same method
(random walk exploration) as Bernus et al. (2019) and Bernus et al. (2020) and the one given in Column
MC corresponds to MCMC results.
                                       GWTC-1   GWTC-3   INPOP17a   INPOP19a       INPOP21a
                                                                                 RW    MCMC
           CL                          0.90     0.90       0.90       0.90       0.9     0.9
      Graviton mass
    λg × 10−13 [km]                    2.6      9.77       1.83       3.93      12.01    209.67
    mg × 1023 [eV/c2 ]                 4.7      1.27       6.76       3.16       1.03     0.059
       Fifth Force
  √λ × 10−13 [km], α > 0                                   1.83       3.93
       |α|
  √λ         × 10−13 [km], α < 0                                      3.77
       |α|




the constraints from ephemerides on the one hand, and from gravitational waves on

the other hand, to be at the same level accuracy.

       Each type of constraints is relevant on its own right given that they test different

phenomenologies—that is, Eq. (145) versus Eq. (152)—which may (or may not) be

related, depending on the underlying massive gravity theory that one is considering.

For instance, screening mechanisms that kick-in for high density environments—

such as the Vainshtein mechanism (Babichev and Deffayet, 2013)—may impact Eq.

(145) and not Eq. (152). This notably seems to be the case for ghost-free massive

gravity (de Rham, 2014).


4.5 Yukawa potential and Fifth Force

Whereas one can imagine that the metric field itself has a mass—see Sec. 4.4—it is

also possible to imagine the existence of additional gravitational fields that are mas-

sive, while the metric field would remain massless. In such situations, the potential

often32 becomes an affine function of the Yukawa suppression as follows (Wagoner,

1970; Fischbach et al., 1992; Will, 2014)


                                       w = wNewton (1 + αexp(−r/λ)),                              (153)

  32
       But not always (Hees et al., 2018).
                         Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


104      CONTENTS

where α is the strength (relative to gravity) and λ the range of the force. This type

of modifications of the Newtonian potential is often referred to as a fifth force (Will,

2014).

Depending on whether the additional massive field couples universally to matter or

not, the fifth force can be either composition-dependent or independent (Will, 2014).

Solar system tests—such as the ones realised with planetary ephemerides—usually

focus on composition independent models. In Konopliv et al. (2011), constraints on

the Yukawa potential were deduced from the analysis of Mars orbiter tracking data

and from the construction of a Mars updated ephemeris. Fig. 10 shows that already in

2011, the constraints from planetary ephemerides were at the level of the constraints

from lunar ephemerides. As explained in Bernus et al. (2019), in the limit λ ≫ r and

with α > 0, one can use the constraints given in Sect 4.4 for the test of massive gravi-

ton, in order to deduce constraints on the Yukawa potential. These constraints are

given in Table 7 and Fig. 10. The green lines on this Figure show the improvements of

the new generation of planetary ephemerides relative to the one use in Konopliv et al.

(2011), as well as the new limits obtained at solar system scale. A new limit (labelled

IBC) obtained by simulating the introduction of Bepi-Colombo MORE experiments

as predicted by De Marchi and Cascioli (2020) and Fienga et al. (2022) is also indi-

cated. Let note that, because fifth force models in Eq. (153) depend on two parameters

(α and λ), whereas the massive graviton models in Eq. (145) depend on only one

(λg ), the mapping between the two breaks down for small Compton wavelength. This

explains why the green lines in Fig. 10 are restricted to the right part of the plot.


4.6 Einstein-dilaton theories

The case of Einstein-dilaton theories is somewhat very interesting for the phe-

nomology of alternative theories in the solar system, because it allows one to

consistently derive the equations of motion, Shapiro delay and conserved quantities

in a framework that leads to a violation of both the WEP and the GWEP.
                                       Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                                                 CONTENTS                105

                         0




                                            geophysics [A03]
                             laboratory [A03]

                       −5
                                                                                                             3]
                                                               Lageos [A03]                              [A0
                                                                                                       tary
                 |α|                                                                                Pla
                                                                                                        ne
                                                                                                        [I17a]

                                                                                                        [I19a]
                                                                          LLR [A03]
                       −10
                                                                                      Mars [K11]



                                                                                           [I21a]

                                                                                                    [I21a+MC]




                       −15

                                              0                     5                       10
                                                                  λ [m]


Fig. 10 Observational constraints obtained for the Yukawa potential extracted from A03, standing for
Adelberger et al. (2003b). The green lines give the constraints deduced from the INPOP planetary
ephemerides graviton tests presented in Table 7 : I17a stands for Bernus et al. (2019), I19a for Bernus et al.
(2020), I21a and I21a+MC for Mariani et al. (2023). K11 indicates the limits deduced from Mars tracking
data analysis by Konopliv et al. (2011).


     Einstein-dilaton theories are scalar-tensor theories that violate the WEP at the

fundamental level, because they possess at least one massless scalar-field that cou-

ples non-minimally to matter fields. They are somewhat expected as being the low

energy effective gravitational action of string theories (Damour and Polyakov, 1994;

Damour et al., 2002)33 —and other higher than four dimensional theories (Overduin

and Wesson, 1997)—which generically predict the existence of one (or several) addi-

tional scalar-field(s) that mediates gravity: the dilaton field (and the moduli fields that

come from the compactification of the extra-dimensions in string theories). Tests of

Einstein-dilaton theories with planetary motions have been proposed by Damour and

Donoghue (2011) based on the equations of Damour and Donoghue (2010). The first

   33
      Let us note, however, that the current consensus among string theorists is that all the scalar fields acquire a potential
through the moduli stabilization mechanism (Douglas and Kachru, 2007), such that they mediate gravity with a very small
range instead of being of infinite range—unlike the part of gravity that is mediated by the metric field.
                                 Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


106         CONTENTS

results for the massless dilaton with planetary ephemerides have been published in

Bernus et al. (2022).


4.6.1 Equations of motion and Shapiro delay

The general action for an Einstein-dilaton theory34 may be written as (Minazzoli and

Hees, 2016; Bernus et al., 2022)

                                                                  √
                                    Z                         
                                1                ω(φ) µ
               S [g, ψi , φ] =          f (φ)R −       φ φ,µ         −g d4 x
                               2κc                  φ
                                                                                                                 (154)
                                                                       √
                                    Z
                                  1
                               +      (LSM [g, ψi ] + Lint [g, ψi , φ]) −g d4 x
                                  c

where LSM is the Lagrangian density of matter described by the standard model of

particle physics and Lint the Lagrangian density of the interactions between the dila-

ton field φ and matter. Such interactions can be parametrized by arbitrary functions

of the scalar-field as follows




                            De (φ)βe (e)            Dg (φ)β3 (g3 ) a µν
                   Lint = −              Fµν F µν −               Gµν Ga
                                 2e                     2g3
                            X
                          −     (Dmi (φ) + γmi Dg (φ))mi ψ̄i ψi                                                  (155)
                              i=e,u,d



 where Fµν is the Faraday tensor, Gaµν is the gluons tensor, e and g3 are respec-

tively the photons and the gluons coupling constants, βe (e) = λ∂ ln e/∂λ and

β3 (g3 ) = λ∂ ln g3 /∂λ are their respective beta functions relative to the quantum

scale invariance violation, where λ is the energy scale of the considered physical

processes, mi is the fermion mass, ψi their spinor, and γmi = −λ∂ ln m/∂λ is the

beta function relative to the dimensional anomaly of the fermion masses coupled to

   34
      With a massless dilaton field. Note that Damour and Donoghue (2010) assume that the phenomenology they derive
is valid for light dilaton fields as well. However, even a minute mass can lead to an entirely different phenomenology in
the solar system, as one can check in (Hees et al., 2018).
                                   Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                                              CONTENTS                    107

the gluons. The Di (φ) functions describe the different couplings between the mat-

ter fields and the dilaton. This Lagrangian density is a straightforward non-linear

generalisation of the action considered by Damour and Donoghue (2010). 35

     Assuming a linear coupling—such as in Damour and Donoghue (2010)—and at

leading order in the composition dependent effects, the acceleration reads (Bernus

et al., 2022)



                                                                                 (
              X µA                                               X       µA         2           2
aT = −                3     rAT (1 + δT + δAT ) −                        3 c2 rAT γvT + (γ + 1)vA
                     rAT                                                rAT
             A̸=T                                               A̸=T
                                                            2                                                                    )
                            3                    rAT .vA           1             X µB     X µB
         − 2(1 + γ)vA .vT −                                       − rAT .aA − 2γ        +
                            2                     rAT              2               rT B     rAB
                                                                                              B̸=T                B̸=A
              X        µA
         +            2 3  [2(1 + γ)rAT .vT − (1 + 2γ)rAT .vA ] (vT − vA )
                     c rAT
             A̸=T
             3 + 4γ X µA
         +                  aA                                                                                         (156)
                2    c2 rAT
                         A̸=T



Eq. (156) depends on γ = (1 − α02 )/(1 + α02 ) and δA = δA
                                                         d    N
                                                           + δA       d
                                                                with δA =

α0 α̃A /(1 + α02 ) and δA
                        N
                          = (γ − 1)ωA | /m̃A c2 where ωA is the self-gravitational

energy of the body A. The fundamental parameters on top of which they are built

are α0 , the universal coupling constant, and α̃A = dm̂ QA         A         A
                                                         m̂ + dδm Qδm + dme Qme +

de QA          A     A     A         A
    e , where Qm̂ , Qδm , Qme , and Qe are the dilatonic charges, estimated according

to the composition of the considered bodies. In these equations, A stands for the

planet to consider, µA being its gravitational parameter. Bernus et al. (2022) simplify

the problem by considering two average charges for the telluric and gaseous bodies

    35
       Although note that in Damour and Donoghue (2010), the dilaton fields does not couple to all the trace terms—that
is, the classical part of the trace in addition to all the relevant quantum trace anomalies. However, it has been shown in
Nitti and Piazza (2012) that it is much more convenient to consider the parametrization in Eq.(155) because it recovers
the fact that in the limit of metric theories, the dilaton field couples to the total trace, as it should. Indeed, with this
parametrization, metric theories corresponds to Di = Dj ∀i, j. The fact that in metric theories, any gravitational scalar
degree of freedom must couple to the total trace is a property of conformal couplings. This is consistent to the fact that
the mass of a composite object equals the total trace of the fields that compose the particle due to the constraint that the
internal stresses all vanish (this is true even if some of the internal forces do not contribute to the trace, such as classical
electromagtetism) (Nitti, 2022).
                           Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


108      CONTENTS

only, because of the similar dilatonic charges for these two classes of objects. This

approximation leads to the reduction of the number of the tested parameters from 10

to 3 for the linear coupling case: α0 , α̃T , α̃G , for which T and G stand for telluric

and gaseous bodies respectively. Let note that µA is here the product of G with the

gravitational mass mG
                    A.

From there, one has to also account for different effects, such as the Nordvedt effect
                                                 N           3µA
that (in the case of the linear coupling) reads δA = −(1−γ) 5RAc
                                                                 2 with RA the planet


radius, or the modification of the time travel that, at the required level of accuracy,

reads (Bernus et al., 2022)

                                                                         4µ
                            X                      µA n · rrA + rrA + c2A
        c(tr − te ) = R +          (1 + γ − δA )      ln                      .   (157)
                               A
                                                   c2    n · reA + reA + 4µ
                                                                          c2
                                                                            A




Let us note that

                               (1 + γ − δA )µA = (1 + γ)µIA ,                     (158)

at the required level of accuracy, where µIA is the gravitational parameter constructed

with the inertial mass, such that µIA = (1−δA )µA . This means that the mass involved

in the Shapiro delay is the inertial mass and not the gravitational mass—as already

discussed in Sec. 4.2.5.



4.6.2 Conserved quantities and the definition of the SSB

From the Lagrangian formulation of the equations of motion, Bernus et al. (2022)

show that the following barycenter constant vector is a first integral of the equations

of motion

                                         q = G − V t,                             (159)

where                                              
                  c2 X                v 2
                                            1 X µB
               G=      µA zA 1 − δA + A2 − 2                                    (160)
                  h                   2c   2c   rAB
                           A                                     B̸=A
                          Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                   CONTENTS         109

are the coordinates of the relativistic barycenter of the system and


                                              c2 P
                                        V =                                       (161)
                                               h


is the velocity of the barycenter motion. h is the conserved energy—whose value

does not affect what follows but can be found in Bernus et al. (2022)—and P is the

conserved linear momentum that reads


                      X
               P =        pA
                      A
                                                      
                      X                   1       X µB
                                              2
                  =       µA vA 1 − δA + 2 vA −       
                                         2c         rAB
                      A                                  B̸=A

                        1 X X µA µB
                      − 2           (nAB · vA )nAB .                              (162)
                       2c      rAB
                               A B̸=A



From Eq. (162), one can see that the sum at leading order is over the gravitational

parameter based on the inertial mass µIA , because one has µIA = µA (1−δA ) at leading

order. This can be used in order to check what has been discussed in Sec. 4.2.4. Let

us note that it is consistent with Klioner (2016), and with Damour and Vokrouhlický

(1995) in the δA = 0 limit.




4.6.3 Results

In Bernus et al. (2022), the planetary ephemerides used were INPOP19a (Fienga

et al., 2019b) and, as in Fienga et al. (2020b), after integrating Eq. (156) for all

bodies, the orbits are adjusted to planetary observations and statistical criteria (cost

functions) are applied for selecting the distribution of the tested parameters for which

deduced ephemerides are compatible with instrumental uncertainties. The obtained

results for the linear coupling parameters are given in Table 8.
                              Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


110        CONTENTS

Table 8 Intervals of possible values for the 3 dilaton parameters as defined in Bernus et al. (2022): α0 ,
the universal coupling, αT the telluric planet coupling and αG the gazeous planet coupling.
                                                       INPOP19a
                                                   (Bernus et al., 2022)
                           Confidence:                90%               99.5%
                           α0 (×105 )         −0.94 ± 5.35        1.01 ± 23.7
                           αT (×106 )          0.24 ± 1.62        0.00 ± 24.5
                           αG (×105 )          0.01 ± 4.38 −1.46 ± 12.0
                           (γ − 1) × 108            0.2± 6          0.2 ± 11.2



    At 3-σ , Bernus et al. (2022) obtained constraints at the level of 10−4 for α0 and

αG and 10−5 for αT . These results reflect the better accuracy reached for the telluric

planets in planetary ephemerides thanks mainly to Mars orbiters. They should be

improved by the future Bepi-Colombo measurements of Mercury orbit.



4.7 MOND

The modified Newtonian dynamics (MOND) is a framework that modifies Newto-

nian dynamics a = gN (where a is the acceleration of a test particle and gN is the

Newtonian gravitational field) by a = g with (Milgrom, 1983, 2014)


                                              µ g = gN ,                                            (163)


where the interpolating function µ is a function of the ratio g/a0 between the norm of

the gravitational field g and the MOND acceleration scale a0 . It was developed as an

alternative explanation of the galactic rotation curves and the empirical Tully–Fisher

relation without relying on dark matter haloes (Milgrom, 1983). Several attempts to

verify this framework at scales different from the galactic one have been made in the

past years (Milgrom, 2009; Blanchet and Novak, 2011; Magueijo and Bekenstein,

2007; Skordis and Złośnik, 2021). In the solar system, three main consequences of

the MOND phenomenology have been studied (Milgrom, 1983; Hees et al., 2014a).

Two of them have been shown to be negligible considering uncertainties of planetary

mean motions (Sereno and Jetzer, 2006). The last one is not negligible however, and
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                CONTENTS             111

is known as the External Field Effect (EFE) (Milgrom, 2009, 2010; Blanchet and

Novak, 2011). The effect stems from the non-linearity of MOND equations, and—

at leading order in the multipole expansion (Blanchet and Novak, 2011)—it induces

an anomalous quadrupolar correction to the Newtonian potential δΦ(Q2 ) that reads

(Milgrom, 2009)
                                                
                                    Q2 2   2   1
                         δΦ(Q2 ) = − r cos θ −     ,                                (164)
                                    2          3
where θ could be the angle pointing either toward the Galactic center, or toward the

Newtonian galactic field—depending on the model considered (Hees et al., 2014b).

This factor Q2 changes with the shape of the MOND coupling functions and, in the

solar system, Blanchet and Novak (2011) estimated that the values of Q2 can vary

from 3.8 × 10−26 to 4.1 × 10−26 s−2 , and then evaluated that it would therefore lead

to additional advances of perihelia up to 5.81 mas.cy−1 for Saturn and even bigger

values for Uranus (-10.94 mas.cy−1 ). Milgrom (2009) had also proposed additional

Saturn perihelion precession rate of about 1.8 mas.cy−1 . Nevertheless—as notably

emphasized in (Blanchet and Novak, 2011)—it is not consistent to take into account

only a particular MOND effect, like perihelion precession, and to compare it with

constraints obtained in other frameworks, such as the PPN framework. To tackle this

issue, Hees et al. (2014b) re-adjusted the parameters of planetary ephemeris when

the EFE is taken into account. In (Hees et al., 2014b), the anomalous quadrupolar

correction enters directly as a modification of the space-time metric that reads:

                     
                           2µ               µ 2 
                ds2 = −1 + 2 − 2δΦ(Q2 ) + 2 2       c2 dt2
                          c r               c r
                                       
                            2µ
                     + 1 + 2 + 2δΦ(Q2 ) dl2 ,                                       (165)
                           c r


with dl2 ≡ dx2 + dy 2 + dz 2 , because this is what one ought to expect from a

relativistic realisation of MOND dynamics. Using this new definition of the metric,

Hees et al. (2014b) introduced modifications into the EIHDL equations of motion
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


112      CONTENTS

and in the Shapiro delay. An alternative planetary ephemeris has been built in this

new framework and has been adjusted to observations. A specific focus has been

brought on the Saturn orbit as it is supposed to be the most affected by the MOND

modification (as also estimated by Hees et al. (2014b),) but also the most constrained

by accurate observations (in this case Cassini tracking data). By fitting directly Q2

with the rest of the planetary parameters, Hees et al. (2014b) obtained a constraint on

Q2 of about (3 ± 3) × 10−27 s−2 , which excludes a important interval of Q2 values

computed theoretically in Blanchet and Novak (2011) for various MOND interpolat-

ing functions µ. Considering other coupling functions, it is still possible to maintain

a MOND formalism in the solar system but at the cost of very limited possibilities

of couplings. This result is consistent with Milgrom (2009) for which the predicted

perihelion precession for Saturn, estimated for coupling functions µα with α > 1/3,

was significantly smaller than in Blanchet and Novak (2011).



5 Inconsistent tests with ephemeris outputs

In the literature, it is possible to find a wide range of constraints supposedly deduced

from planetary ephemerides. There are of two types:

   The first type of tests are those considering residuals obtained after the mod-

ifications of the equations of motion of the planetary systems— by, for example,

introducing additional terms produced by general relativity-like linearization of an

alternative theory— but without re-adjusting the newly modified dynamical system to

observations. This approach is equivalent to not considering any attempt to improve

the ephemerides as described in Fig. 4 in Sec. 2.2. It is clearly an issue because any

modification of the dynamical model must be re-adjusted to observations before any

interpretation of the obtained residuals. In essence, any comparison of a simulation,

which presupposed the parameters of the solar system bodies inferred in a different

theoretical framework, with the observations, will likely overestimate the deviations
                         Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                  CONTENTS           113

in the new theoretical framework. This would primarily be because the simulation did

not use the most appropriate set of parameters for the solar system bodies—which

are, those that minimize the residuals, and which are obtained through readjustment

in a given framework. We can refer the reader to the extensive discussion of this very

basic concept applied to the massive gravity problem and notably presented in the

supplementary materials of Bernus et al. (2019).

   The second category of indirect tests involves what we will term as derived quan-

tities, as explained in Sec. 5.1. We will discuss these indirect tests in detail in the

upcoming section.




5.1 Definitions

Several quantities can be provided as outputs of a given planetary ephemeris, notably

in order to give an idea of the accuracy of that ephemeris with respect to specific

aspects of the solar system phenomenology—such as, for instance, the values of the

perihelion and node advances per orbit for a given astronomical body, and their uncer-

tainties; or the secular variation of the gravitational constant Ġ/G and its uncertainty.

We shall call those quantities derived quantities in what follows.

   Derived quantities could also be the values and uncertainties of parameters such

as the post-Newtonian parameters γ and β , or of the Compton wavelength in mas-

sive gravity, or in the context of a fifth force. Table 9 gives a non-exhaustive series

of examples of possible interpretations of planetary ephemeris derived quantities for

testing alternative theories. It falls outside the scope of this review to detail theories

that have not been confronted and re-adjusted against planetary observations but have

only considered the derived quantities defined above. The reason for limiting this

review to fully tested theories, as presented in Sec. 4, is our belief that the published

constraints listed in Table 9 yield to unrealistic constraints, as we will explain in
                               Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


114       CONTENTS

Table 9 Examples of interpretation of ephemeris derived parameters. dϖ̇supp and dΩ̇supp indicate the
supplementary advances in perihelia and nodes respectively.
 Theories                Section            Impact on orbits         References
 MOND                    4.7               dϖ̇supp , dΩ̇supp         (Blanchet and Novak, 2011)
 AWE/chameleons                      variation of PPN parameters     (Füzfa and Alimi, 2007)
                                                   EP                (Burrage and Sakstein, 2018)
 Scalar field theories                            Ġ/G               (Uzan, 2003)
                                    variation of of PPN parameters
 dark Energy                                      Ġ/G               (Steinhardt and Wesley, 2009)
 dark Matter             5.2               linear drift of AU        (Arakida, 2010)
                                                 asupp               (Nordtvedt, 1994)
                                           dϖ̇supp , dΩ̇supp         (Frère et al., 2008)
 Yukawa, fifth force     4.5                    dϖ̇supp              (Merkowitz, 2010)
 f(r)                                            asupp               (de Felice and Tsujikawa, 2010)
                                    variation of of PPN parameters
 Massive graviton        4.4               dϖ̇supp , dΩ̇supp         (Will, 2018a)


Secs. 5.3 and 5.4. In particular, considering only derived quantities or un-fitted resid-

uals is equivalent to neglecting that these latest were obtained in a given framework

(usually general relativity), with instrumental uncertainties and correlations between

parameters.


5.2 The case of the advance of the perihelia and nodes

It is traditional when one investigates possible laws of gravitation in the solar sys-

tem to follow the Einstein’s steps and to consider supplementary advances in the

planetary orbital angles (mainly perihelion and node). Several methods have been

developed in the past fifty years in order to estimate possible remaining advances in

planetary perihelia and nodes that can be fully explained by general relativity.

The most direct method (i.e. presented in Pitjeva and Pitjev (2013)) is the adjust-

ment of a quantity ∆ϖ or ∆Ω (respectively supplementary advances of perihelia

and node) for all of the planetary orbits or only for some of them, together with

the rest of the planetary and relativistic parameters (masses, Sun oblateness, initial

conditions, PPN parameters...). One can get an intuition from Eq. (100) that the fit of

such derived quantities is affected by strong correlations between various parameters

of the ephemeris, such that the results are plagued with biases and underestimated

uncertainties.
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                 CONTENTS           115

The second approach is to introduce possible rotations of the planetary planes while

considering ∆ϖ or ∆Ω fixed, and to build new planetary ephemerides integrated

with these fixed additional rotations and fitted to observations. The result is then the

limit of possible rotations that one can add without degrading the planetary residuals

(i.e. Fienga et al. (2018)). The advantage with the method is the uncorrelated estima-

tion of maximum value for ∆ϖ or ∆Ω, the drawback is that what is obtained is only

an upper bound.

Finally, a third method consists in averaging planetary orbits (Park et al., 2017) for

obtaining residual precession of the perihelia. In this case, as for the two former

methods, the deduced residual precession could be induced by a violation of general

relativity, but also—and more likely—by some other sources of uncertainties (i.e

unmodeled asteroid perturbations).

Table 10 gathers some of the recently obtained values for ∆ϖ, following the three

methods described above. However, based on the arguments presented in this sect.

5, the direct interpretation of these quantities, ∆ϖ or ∆Ω, in terms of possible

violation of general relativity is strongly discouraged.




Estimation of the dark matter density in the solar system

An example of misleading conclusion can be taken from the dark matter density esti-

mation. In Pitjeva and Pitjev (2013), direct estimations of the density of the dark

matter inside the orbit of Saturn have been tested using two different implementa-

tions. The first one consists in adding an additional acceleration to the equations of

motion of the EPM planetary ephemerides such as:


                                         µM (R)
                               aDM
                                A  =            rAT ,                             (166)
                                          rAT
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


116      CONTENTS

where µM (R) is the gravitational parameter of an additional matter in a sphere of

radius R around the Sun. It turned out that such a direct modeling is highly affected

by the uncertainties induced by the asteroid masses and no conclusive measurement

of the mass of dark matter inside the solar system has been obtained in using Eq.

(166). The second attempt in Pitjeva and Pitjev (2013) was from the secular advance
               DM
of perihelia dϖA  following the equation from Khriplovich and Pitjeva (2006)


                                          ρDM
                                                 q
                           DM
                         ∆ϖA  = −3π                  1 − e2A ,                    (167)
                                          Msun

        DM
where ∆ϖA  is the supplementary advance of perihelia of the planet A induced

by dark matter of density ρDM , supposed uniformly distributed at the planetary dis-

tances, eA being the eccentricity of the orbit. The most stringent constraint gives a

density for the dark matter up to the Saturn orbit of about ρDM < 1.1 × 10−20

g.cm−3 , leading to a dark matter mass smaller than 7.1 ×10−11 solar mass. It is inter-

esting to note that this estimation is 5 orders of magnitude higher than the density

for local dark matter halo proposed by McMillan (2011); Weber, M. and de Boer, W.

(2010); Wardana, M. Dafa et al. (2020) and estimated either by galactic simulations

or by fit to observations (including Gaia DR2 in (Wardana, M. Dafa et al., 2020)).

The third approach is in the interpretation of the secular variation of the Sun gravita-

tional mass as a combination of several phenomena including the fall of dark matter

towards the Sun (Press and Spergel, 1985; Lundberg and Edsjö, 2004; Blennow et al.,

2018) . In the scenario of dark matter falling into the Sun, the mass of the Sun should

decrease less rapidly. However one can discuss the difficulty of disentangling the dif-

ferent contributions from dust and comets falling into the Sun and plasma ejecta that

have to be accounted for in the Sun mass equation (see sect. 4.3 for discussion). An

attempt has been proposed by Kardashev et al. (2005) but leading to a constraint of

few percents of the sun mass that can be assimilated to falling dark matter. This value
                               Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                                CONTENTS               117

Table 10 1-σ uncertainties (mas/yr) on the perihelion advance per orbit as extracted from (Pitjeva and
Pitjev, 2013) using a full fit of the advances and of the associated ephemeris, from (Fienga et al., 2018)
and (Fienga et al., 2011b) with fixed values of the maximum advances and from (Park et al., 2017).
                     Planet       (Pitjeva and Pitjev, 2013)    (Fienga et al., 2011b)
                     Mercury                 0.03                      0.006
                     Venus                  0.016                       0.015
                     Earth                 0.0019                       0.009
                     Mars                 0.00037                      0.0015
                     Jupiter                0.28                         0.42
                     Saturn               0.0047                       0.0065
                                    (Fienga et al., 2018)         (Park et al., 2017)
                     Mercury               0.02                         0.015


is even bigger than the one proposed by Pitjeva and Pitjev (2013) and is therefore not

in agreement with the expected estimations for local dark matter density.

    Recently, Belbruno and Green (2022) simulated the impact of dark matter located

in the galactic halo on the motion of objects in the solar system. Their conclusions are

that only objects located in the outer solar system (after 80 AU), or objects situated

in saddle points, can allow a detection. This is consistent with what has been already

discussed, for example, by Klioner and Soffel (1993). Finally, in sect. 4.7, the deter-

mination of Q2 obtained by Hees et al. (2014b) can also be seen as a measurement of

the Galactic potential acting on the solar system, either induced by the stellar popu-

lation or induced by dark matter. This value presented in sect. 4.7, shows a clear lack

of sensitivity of planetary ephemeris for the detection of the tidal interactions coming

from our galaxy.

    All these results favour the fact that planetary ephemerides are not yet accurate

enough to measure local dark matter influences in the solar system.


5.3 What can often be found in the literature

Most of the bounds in the literature do not come from planetary ephemerides devel-

oped in a given theoretical or phenomenological framework, but instead they use the

uncertainty on derived quantities as an input of the maximum tolerated departure

from general relativity that would be compatible with observations. For instance, if
                         Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


118       CONTENTS

the uncertainty on the perihelion advance per orbit for a given astronomical body and

a given ephemeris is less than a specific value, it is often assumed that any modifi-

cation of gravity has to induce an effect that is less than this former limit. Therefore,

if one computes that a specific theory should induce an effect on, e.g., the perihelion

advance per orbit for an astronomical body that is bigger than the uncertainty on this

derived quantity, then it is often claimed that this constraint rules out this specific

theory.

   At first sight, it seems like a reasonable thing to do. Unfortunately, doing this

is problematic for the simple reason that derived quantities are obtained assuming

a specific theoretical framework, and that there is no guarantee that the adjusted

parameters of the ephemeris (masses, initial conditions etc.) would be the same in

another theoretical framework. Even more, it is not impossible, a priori, that another

theoretical framework actually leads to smaller residuals than general relativity after

adjusting the parameters of the ephemeris in this framework—which would mean

that this alternative to general relativity is favoured by the data for the considered

model of the solar system.

   In other words, while one would claim to have derived a constraint on an alter-

native theory from a derived quantity, actually one could very well have missed a

signal in favour of the alternative theory instead—which is precisely the opposite of

giving a constraint. This shows that using derived quantities as an input to constrain

alternatives to general relativity is not trustworthy in general.

   The only way to compare the merit of two different theoretical frameworks is

to compare statistically the accuracy of the ephemerides adjusted to the data in

each theoretical framework—that is, the statistical amplitude of their residuals. If

the ephemeris in a given theoretical framework has significantly better (i.e. smaller)

residuals than in another theoretical framework, then it means that the former is

favoured by the data within the planetary model considered. Different planetary
                                    Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                                             CONTENTS                   119

models—see e.g. Sects. 3.3.2 and 3.3.4—might also lead to different answers with

this respect.



5.4 Why consistency matters

The reason why the adjusted parameters of an ephemeris (masses, initial conditions

etc.) are in general different when one considers an alternative theory to general rela-

tivity is because all the parameters of the ephemeris, the ones describing gravity (e.g.

PPN parameters, Compton wavelength of the Yukawa suppression etc.) and the ones

describing the bodies themselves and their orbits (masses, initial conditions, shapes

etc.), are more or less correlated to one another. The high degree of correlation is also

somewhat accentuated by the specific symmetry of planetary orbits, because most

of the motions are close to the ecliptic plane (and with relatively low eccentricities),

which limits the disentanglement of the effects of different parameters during the

fit of the ephemeris parameters—as one can get an intuition from the approximated

analytical expression, for instance, of the advance of the node Eq. (100).

       This is exemplified notably with the oblateness of the Sun J2⊙ in Figs. 6 and 9.36

Indeed, due to the high level of correlations between the oblateness of the Sun and

the PPN parameters γ and β , both the adjusted value of the J2⊙ and its uncertainty

are affected when γ and β are not set to 1 a priori (see sec 4.1 for a full discussion) .

       From a formal perspective, Eq. (100) gives a good illustration of the problem in

terms of perihelion advance per planetary orbit. Because many different parameters

contribute to the advance, if an advance is, say, induced by a parameter related to the

description of gravity beyond what is acceptable in terms of deviation with respect to

the data, the fit will often lead to a modification of other parameters in order to com-

pensate for this unacceptable contribution—such that, in the end, the final solution

remains as close as possible to the data (i.e. the residuals are minimised).

  36
       See also Fig. 6 in (Milani et al., 2002) for an illustration of the correlation between J2⊙ and β − 1 in simulations.
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


120      CONTENTS

    As long as the statistical properties of the residuals of the ephemerides in dis-

tinct theoretical frameworks are not significantly different, one cannot say which

of the two theoretical frameworks better explains the observations. This tells why

one cannot simply estimate the modification of the perihelion advance per orbit in

an alternative theory and compare it with the output value obtained while assuming

general relativity.

    Another example is given by the Compton wavelength of a Yukawa suppression

of the Newtonian potential in a massive gravity framework—see sect. 4.4. An illus-

tration of the high degree of correlations between parameters is given by Bernus

et al. (2019) in a table—reproduced here in Table 11— that gathers the correlations

between the Compton wavelength and some of the solar system parameters for the

INPOP17a planetary model.

Furthermore, statistics of the residuals for several planets were also displayed by

Bernus et al. (2019) in order to show their evolution if one assumes that the solar sys-

tem parameters are given by fits obtained when assuming general relativity instead of

re-adjusting them in the massive gravity framework. The conclusion of this investi-

gation is that not adjusting planetary ephemeris parameters within the framework of

massive gravity would have led to an overestimation of the constraint on the value of

the Compton wavelength by about one order of magnitude.




The Pioneer anomaly

Finally, one can discuss the case of the Pioneer anomaly. For some years, the unex-

plained supplementary acceleration detected during the navigation of Pioneer 10 and

11 escaping the solar system, keeps the community active in looking for some pos-

sible violations of GR that could produce such a phenomena. The reader can see

(Turyshev and Toth, 2010) for a complete review. Among the alternative theories

that were proposed to explain the Pioneer anomaly, some also impact the orbits of
                           Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                        CONTENTS             121

Table 11 Examples of correlations from (Bernus et al., 2019) between various INPOP17b parameters
and the Compton wavelength λg . a, EMB and M⊙ state for semi-major axes, the Earth-Moon barycenter
and the mass of the Sun respectively.

                 λg      a Mercury      a Mars     a Saturn     a Venus     a EMB       GM⊙
      λg          1        0.50          0.49        0.04         0.39       0.05        0.66
  a Mercury      ···         1           0.21       0.001         0.97       0.82        0.96
    a Mars       ···        ···            1         0.03         0.29       0.53        0.06
   a Saturn      ···        ···           ···         1          0.003       0.02        0.01
   a Venus       ···        ···           ···        ···            1        0.86        0.94
   a EMB         ···        ···           ···        ···          ···          1         0.73
    GM⊙          ···        ···           ···        ···          ···         ···          1


outer planets. Most of the authors just consider the effect of the induced modifica-

tion of the planetary equations of motion without considering the new adjustment

that one should do for adapting the initial conditions to this new model (Lecian and

Montani, 2009; Iorio, 2009, 2010). In 2009 and 2010, Page et al. (2009); Standish

(2010) and Fienga et al. (2010) show that the modification required for explaining

the Pioneer acceleration anomaly induced, after fit, residuals marginally compati-

ble with the observational accuracies reached at this epoch (before the inputs of the

Juno mission). These results restricted severely the possibility of such modifications

impacting also planetary orbits. After that, only remained the alternative theories that

were affecting the s/c orbit but not the planetary bodies. Another attempt to explain

the Pioneer anomaly within the boundaries of conventional physics that does not

affect the motion of the planetary bodies was put forward by Kopeikin (2012). In

their proposal, the Pioneer effect was perceived as the cosmological consequence of

a quadratic divergence between the time scales of electromagnetic wave propaga-

tion within the Doppler tracking system and the atomic clocks on Earth. However,

Bertolami et al. (2010) and Turyshev et al. (2012) conclusively demonstrated that the

Pioneer acceleration can be explained by considering the distinct thermal properties

of each spacecraft face. Either way, the Pioneer anomaly thus serves as a compelling

illustration of the importance of developing a fully consistent model when testing

alternative theories to General Relativity, and ensuring that this model is fitted to

observations—a step that is undeniably crucial.
                                 Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


122         CONTENTS

6 Future directions

6.1 Theory

On the theory side, many aspects of alternative theories remain to be studied and

implemented in planetary ephemerides. Theorists do not lack of new ideas, and

therefore one should not fall short of new theories to investigate with planetary

ephemerides. However, not all existing theories that can lead to significant variations

in the solar system have been constrained with planetary ephemerides yet. As an

example, not even the full PPN framework Eqs. (114-122) have been completely

investigated so far with planetary ephemerides. This is not a surprise given the many

parameters involved, and given that the more parameters to test, the more difficult,

and computationally demanding, the study is—and also the worse the constraints on

each parameter are.



     Another example can also be given with the case of Brans-Dicke-like scalar-

tensor theories. A considerable portion of Brans-Dicke-like scalar-tensor theories—

that is, theories defined by Lint = 0 in Eq. (154)37 —have been exquisitely

constrained by observations of binary pulsars, owing to a strong field effect that

cannot occur within the solar system. Specifically, with certain selections for the

function ω(ϕ), the scalar-field within compact objects like neutron stars can be ampli-

fied through a nonlinear effect known as scalarization (Damour and Esposito-Farese,

1993; Damour and Esposito-Farèse, 1996). This effect should lead to a significant

violation of the Strong Equivalence Principle38 —see Sec. 4.2.1—that is not seen in

binary pulsars. For a deeper dive into this captivating subject, we direct the reader to

Kramer et al. (2021); Freire et al. (2012); Voisin et al. (2020).



  37
     Indeed, strictly speaking, Brans-Dicke theories are an even more restricted group, which is such that Lint = 0 and
ω(φ) = ωBD in Eq. (154).
  38
     Even, occasionally, with large values of ω(φ0 ).
                                  Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                        CONTENTS    123

       The PPN framework in Sec. 4.1 encompasses this class of theories with γ =

(1 + ω(φ0 ))/(2 + ω(φ0 )), where φ0 is the asymptotic value of φ0 at the edge of the

solar system,39 and β − 1 = ω ′ (φ0 )(3 + 2ω(φ0 ))−2 (4 + 2ω(φ0 ))−1 . The constraints

on γ and β obtained with planetary ephemerides in the PPN framework are given in

Fig. 8.

       However, those constraints assume that γ and β are independent parameters in

the field equations—which lead to the definition of the time and space coordinate

system, the equation of motion (see Eq. 90) and of the Shapiro delay (see Eq. 97)—

while they are not independent in those scalar-tensor theories whenever β ̸= 1—that

is ω ′ (φ0 ) ̸= 0—given that ω(φ0 ) appears in both γ and β .

       As a consequence, one cannot directly convert the constraints in Fig. 8 in terms

of constraints on ω(φ0 ) and ω ′ (φ0 ). Therefore, it would be interesting to test those

specific theories with planetary ephemerides in order to compare with the constraints

with binary pulsars, in the regions of the theory space where one does not have the

non-linear strong-field scalarization effect. For instance, assuming ω(φ) = ωBD —

that is, ω ′ (φ0 ) = 0 and β = 1—tests involving pulsars lead to ωBD > 130 ×

103 (Voisin et al., 2020)—although note that this value depends on the unknown

equations of state of neutron stars.

       Considering the constraint on γ obtained with the Cassini experiment (Bertotti

et al., 2003b), the limit on ω(φ0 ) instead is ω(φ0 ) > 40 × 103 . This threshold

should also be better than what is currently possible with planetary ephemerides—

but perhaps not too far from what will be possible with the additional data from

Bepi-Colombo.

       A general reminder of Sec. 5 is that, while the PPN framework serves as a highly

convenient phenomenological apparatus for testing alternative theories, its limitation

lies in its inability to accommodate potential dependencies between PPN parame-

ters (such as the discussed above or the one of Sec. 4.6) that could emerge within a

  39
       Which could vary over cosmological times.
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


124      CONTENTS

given theory. For example, in Brans-Dicke-like scalar-tensor theories, there is a cer-

tain degree of interdependence at the level of the field equations between γ and β

since they both depend on the parameter ω(φ0 ) of the theory.

   Consequently, one has to keep in mind that it is not generally possible to

directly translate constraints obtained on PPN parameters to potential underlying

theories—unless the theory predicts the parameters to be independent at the level

of the field equations of the considered theory (e.g. Scalar-Tensor, massive gravity,

etc.). Therefore, to establish constraints on the parameters of a specific theory—–like

ω(φ0 ) and ω ′ (φ0 )—– one should directly test that particular theory.




6.2 Observation

In terms of observations, much progress is anticipated, particularly in light of active

or future planetary missions such as Bepi-Colombo. This mission will orbit Mer-

cury for more than a year and will provide unprecedented accurate measures of the

Mercury-Earth distance, and consequently, will produce stringent new limits on devi-

ations from general relativity. A lot of publications propose to include Bepi-Colombo

range simulations in order to provide possible new constraints on classic general rel-

ativity tests, such as advance of the Mercury perihelion, PPN parameter estimations,

SEP or alternative tests (Milani et al., 2002; Ashby et al., 2007; De Marchi et al.,

2016; Imperi et al., 2018; De Marchi and Cascioli, 2020; van der Zwaard and Dirkx,

2022; Fienga et al., 2021a, 2022). As previously explained, a specific care should

be taken on the consistency between the definition of the considered framework (i.e.

harmonics versus non-harmonics gauges, definition of the solar system barycenter

...), the tests performed and the claimed accuracy. The question of consistencies and

correlations between astronomical constraints and general relativity tests in the full

PPN context will then become even more urgent to address.

On the other side of the solar system, missions towards gas giants and outer solar
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                 CONTENTS            125

system will also be interesting for testing another types of general relativity violation

such as dark sector violations or dark matter clumps (Bergé et al., 2021; Bergé et al.,

2018).

Finally, among more exploratory projects, LISA-like configurations for interplane-

tary laser distance measurements between telluric planets (Earth, Mars and Venus)

have been proposed as a way to gain accuracy in planetary ephemerides and sensitiv-

ity to general relativity violations such as the secular variations of the gravitational

constant (Smith et al., 2018). Despite the technical challenges of such project (Bills

and Skillman, 2022; Bills and Gorski, 2022), the outcome of these measurements

would indeed impact the global accuracy of the ephemerides, improve significantly

the Bepi-Colombo results but also allow for better constraints on the distribution of

mass in the solar system.



7 Summary

This paper describes how the planetary ephemerides are built in the framework of

General Relativity and how they can be used to test alternative theories. It focuses

specifically on the dependencies that exist behind the definition of the reference

frame (space and time) in which the planetary ephemeris is described, the equations

of motion that govern the orbits of solar system bodies and electromagnetic waves.

This paper then summarizes the results obtained considering consistent modifica-

tions of the ephemeris framework with direct comparisons with the observations of

planetary systems. The PPN formalism is the one that has been the most heavily

tested, and the results of its confrontation with planetary astrometry constitutes the

most developed part. The paper then moves on to specific alternatives to general

relativity such as Einstein-dilaton theories, a massive graviton phenomenology and

MOND. The paper finally concludes on some comments and recommendations

regarding misinterpreted estimations of the advance of perihelia, giving examples
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


126      CONTENTS

such as the Pioneer anomaly interpretation or some attempts to measure dark matter

in the solar system.

As we hope this paper demonstrates, the consistency of the planetary ephemeris

framework is a crucial aspect in the field of testing alternative theories. Misinterpre-

tations of results obtained in the general relativity framework can lead to significant

errors (e.g. Pioneer anomaly) or over optimistic constraints (e.g. mass of the gravi-

ton).




Acknowledgements

The authors thank Aurélien Hees and Vincenzo Mariani for their valuable inputs

on the initial versions of the paper. OM expresses also gratitude to Francesco Nitti,

Federico Piazza, and Aurélien Hees for stimulating discussions on the relation-

ship between composite particle mass and quantum trace anomalies. AF thanks L.

Blanchet, A. Hees, E. Gourgoulond, S. Reynaud, P. Wolf and C. Will for their sup-

ports, comments, discussions all these years. AF is also debtfull to J. Laskar and

M. Gastineau for the development of the INPOP planetary ephemerides. Finally, AF

is grateful to the French Space Agency and Observatoire de la Côte d’azur for the

financial supports.




References

Abbott BP, and others, The LIGO Scientific Collaboration, the Virgo Collabora-

  tion, the KAGRA Collaboration (2019) GWTC-1: A Gravitational-Wave Transient

  Catalog of Compact Binary Mergers Observed by LIGO and Virgo during the

  First and Second Observing Runs. Physical Review X 9(3):031040, DOI 10.1103/

  PhysRevX.9.031040, 1811.12907
                       Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                              CONTENTS           127

Abbott R, and others, The LIGO Scientific Collaboration, the Virgo Collabora-

  tion, the KAGRA Collaboration (2021) GWTC-3: Compact binary coalescences

  observed by ligo and virgo during the second part of the third observing run. arXiv

  e-prints arXiv:2111.03606, 2111.03606

Adelberger EG (2001) New tests of Einstein’s equivalence principle and Newton’s

  inverse-square law. Classical and Quantum Gravity 18(13):2397–2405, DOI 10.

  1088/0264-9381/18/13/302

Adelberger EG, Fischbach E, Krause DE, Newman RD (2003a) Constraining

  the couplings of massive pseudoscalars using gravity and optical experiments.

  Phys. Rev. D 68(6):062002, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevD.68.062002

Adelberger EG, Heckel BR, Nelson AE (2003b) Tests of the Gravitational Inverse-

  Square Law. Annual Review of Nuclear and Particle Science 53:77–121, DOI 10.

  1146/annurev.nucl.53.041002.110503, hep-ph/0307284

Anderson JD, Colombo G, Espsitio PB, Lau EL, Trager GB (1987) The mass, gravity

  field, and ephemeris of Mercury. Icarus 71:337–349, DOI 10.1016/0019-1035(87)

  90033-9

Anderson JD, Borderies NJ, Campbell JK, Dunne JA, Ellis J, Hellings RW, Lau

  EL, Preston RA, Traxler MR, Williams JG, Yoder CF, Chandler JF, Reasenberg

  RD, Shapiro II, Berthias JP, Blamont J, Linkin VM, Kerzhanovich VV, Akim EL,

  Ivanov NM (1989) Testing general relativity with Landers on the Martian satellite

  Phobos. Advances in Space Research 9(9):71–74, DOI 10.1016/0273-1177(89)

  90009-4

Anderson JD, Keesey MSW, Lau EL, Standish J E M, Newhall XX (1978) Tests of

  general relativity using astrometric and radio metric observations of the planets.

  Acta Astronautica 5:43–61

Antia HM, Chitre SM, Gough DO (2008) Temporal variations in the Sun’s rotational

  kinetic energy. Astron. Astrophys. 477(2):657–663, DOI 10.1051/0004-6361:
                       Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


128     CONTENTS

  20078209, 0711.0799

Arakida H (2010) Influence of dark matter on light propagation in solar sys-

  tem. Advances in Space Research 45:1007–1014, DOI 10.1016/j.asr.2009.11.012,

  0810.2827

Archinal BA, Acton CH, A’Hearn MF, Conrad A, Consolmagno GJ, Duxbury T,

  Hestroffer D, Hilton JL, Kirk RL, Klioner SA, McCarthy D, Meech K, Oberst J,

  Ping J, Seidelmann PK, Tholen DJ, Thomas PC, Williams IP (2018) Report of

  the IAU Working Group on Cartographic Coordinates and Rotational Elements:

  2015. Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy 130(3):22, DOI 10.1007/

  s10569-017-9805-5

Armendariz-Picon C, Penco R (2012) Quantum equivalence principle violations

  in scalar-tensor theories. Phys Rev D 85:044052, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevD.85.

  044052, URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevD.85.044052

Arruga D, Rousselle O, Minazzoli O (2021) Compact objects in entangled relativity.

  Phys. Rev. D 103(2):024034, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevD.103.024034, 2011.14629

Ash ME, Shapiro II, Smith WB (1967) Astronomical constants and planetary

  ephemerides deduced from radar and optical observations. Astron J 72:338–+,

  DOI 10.1086/110230

Ashby N, Bertotti B (2010) Accurate light-time correction due to a gravitating mass.

  Classical and Quantum Gravity 27(14):145013, DOI 10.1088/0264-9381/27/14/

  145013, 0912.2705

Ashby N, Bender PL, Wahr JM (2007) Future gravitational physics tests from ranging

  to the BepiColombo Mercury planetary orbiter. Phys. Rev. D 75(2):022001, DOI

  10.1103/PhysRevD.75.022001

Babichev E, Deffayet C (2013) An introduction to the Vainshtein mechanism. Classi-

  cal and Quantum Gravity 30(18):184001, DOI 10.1088/0264-9381/30/18/184001,

  1304.7240
                       Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                              CONTENTS          129

Babichev E, Deffayet C (2013) An introduction to the vainshtein mechanism. Classi-

  cal and Quantum Gravity 30(18):184001, DOI 10.1088/0264-9381/30/18/184001,

  URL https://doi.org/10.1088/0264-9381/30/18/184001

Barbour J, Pfister H (1995) Mach’s Principle: From Newton’s Bucket to Quantum

  Gravity. Birkhäser, Boston University

Belbruno E, Green J (2022) When leaving the Solar system: Dark matter makes

  a difference. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc.510(4):5154–5163, DOI 10.1093/mnras/

  stab3781, 2201.06575

Bergé J, Christophe B, Foulon B, Hardy E, Pernot-Borras M (2018) ISLAND: the

  Inverse Square Law And Newtonian Dynamics Space Explorer. In: 42nd COSPAR

  Scientific Assembly, vol 42, pp H0.3–6–18, 1809.00698

Bergé J, Baudis L, Brax P, Chiow SW, Christophe B, Doré O, Fayet P, Hees A, Jetzer

  P, Lämmerzahl C, List M, Métris G, Pernot-Borràs M, Read J, Reynaud S, Rhodes

  J, Rievers B, Rodrigues M, Sumner T, Uzan JP, Yu N (2021) The local dark sector.

  Experimental Astronomy 51(3):1737–1766, DOI 10.1007/s10686-021-09734-8,

  1909.00834

Bernus L, Minazzoli O, Fienga A, Gastineau M, Laskar J, Deram P (2019) Constrain-

  ing the Mass of the Graviton with the Planetary Ephemeris INPOP. Phys. Rev. Lett.

  123(16):161103, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevLett.123.161103, 1901.04307

Bernus L, Minazzoli O, Fienga A, Gastineau M, Laskar J, Deram P, Di Ruscio A

  (2020) Constraint on the Yukawa suppression of the Newtonian potential from

  the planetary ephemeris INPOP19a. Phys. Rev. D 102(2):021501, DOI 10.1103/

  PhysRevD.102.021501, 2006.12304

Bernus L, Minazzoli O, Fienga A, Hees A, Gastineau M, Laskar J, Deram P, Di

  Ruscio A (2022) Constraining massless dilaton theory at Solar system scales

  with the planetary ephemeris INPOP. Phys. Rev. D 105(4):044057, DOI 10.1103/

  PhysRevD.105.044057
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


130      CONTENTS

Bertolami O, Francisco F, Gil PJS, Páramos J (2010) Estimating Radiative Momen-

  tum Transfer Through a Thermal Analysis of the Pioneer Anomaly. Space Sci. Rev.

  151(1-3):75–91, DOI 10.1007/s11214-009-9589-3, 0809.2633

Bertone S, Minazzoli O, Crosta M, Le Poncin-Lafitte C, Vecchiato A, Angonin MC

  (2014) Time transfer functions as a way to validate light propagation solutions

  for space astrometry. Classical and Quantum Gravity 31(1):015021, DOI 10.1088/

  0264-9381/31/1/015021, 1306.2367

Bertotti B, Farinella P, Vokrouhlick D (2003a) Physics of the Solar System - Dynam-

  ics and Evolution, Space Physics, and Spacetime Structure., vol 293. DOI 10.1007/

  978-94-010-0233-2

Bertotti B, Iess L, Tortora P (2003b) A test of general relativity using radio links with

  the Cassini spacecraft. Nature 425(6956):374–376, DOI 10.1038/nature01997

Bills B, Skillman D (2022) Planetary orbit dynamics via trilateration: Prospectus

  for an interplanetary scale ring laser gyro with nominal area of 1 square AU.

  Planet. Space Sci. 214:105415, DOI 10.1016/j.pss.2022.105415

Bills BG, Gorski KM (2022) Sensitivity and antenna pattern for an interplanetary

  laser trilateration network. Planet. Space Sci. 215:105423, DOI 10.1016/j.pss.

  2022.105423

Biskupek L, Müller J, Torre JM (2021) Benefit of New High-Precision LLR Data

  for the Determination of Relativistic Parameters. Universe 7(2):34, DOI 10.3390/

  universe7020034, 2012.12032

Blanchet L, Novak J (2011) External field effect of modified Newtonian dynam-

  ics in the Solar system. Mon Not R Astron Soc 412:2530–2542, DOI 10.1111/j.

  1365-2966.2010.18076.x, 1010.1349

Blennow M, Clementz S, Herrero-Garcia J (2018) The distribution of inelastic dark

  matter in the sun. The European Physical Journal C 78(5):386, DOI 10.1140/epjc/

  s10052-018-5863-4, URL https://doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-018-5863-4
                       Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                              CONTENTS          131

Burrage C, Sakstein J (2018) Tests of chameleon gravity. Living Reviews in Rel-

  ativity 21(1):1, DOI 10.1007/s41114-018-0011-x, URL https://doi.org/10.1007/

  s41114-018-0011-x

Camargo JIB, Veiga CH, Vieira-Martins R, Fienga A, Assafin M (2022) The five

  largest satellites of Uranus: Astrometric observations spread over 29 years at the

  Pico dos Dias Observatory. Planet. Space Sci. 210:105376, DOI 10.1016/j.pss.

  2021.105376, 2112.02167

Capitaine N, Klioner S, McCarthy D (2012) The re-definition of the astronomi-

  cal unit of length:reasons and consequences. In: IAU Joint Discussion, IAU Joint

  Discussion, p 40

Cappuccio P, Notaro V, di Ruscio A, Iess L, Genova A, Durante D, di Stefano

  I, Asmar SW, Ciarcia S, Simone L (2020) Report on First Inflight Data of

  BepiColombo’s Mercury Orbiter Radio Science Experiment. IEEE Transactions

  on Aerospace Electronic Systems 56(6):4984–4988, DOI 10.1109/TAES.2020.

  3008577

Cappuccio P, di Stefano I, Cascioli G, Iess L (2021) Comparison of light-time formu-

  lations in the post-Newtonian framework for the BepiColombo MORE experiment.

  Classical and Quantum Gravity 38(22):227001, DOI 10.1088/1361-6382/ac2b0a,

  2201.05092

Charlot P, Jacobs CS, Gordon D, Lambert S, de Witt A, Böhm J, Fey AL, Heinkel-

  mann R, Skurikhina E, Titov O, Arias EF, Bolotin S, Bourda G, Ma C, Malkin

  Z, Nothnagel A, Mayer D, MacMillan DS, Nilsson T, Gaume R (2020) The

  third realization of the International Celestial Reference Frame by very long

  baseline interferometry. Astron. Astrophys. 644:A159, DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/

  202038368, 2010.13625

Courde C, Torre JM, Samain E, Martinot-Lagarde G, Aimar M, Albanese D, Exertier

  P, Fienga A, Mariey H, Metris G, Viot H, Viswanathan V (2017) Lunar laser
                      Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


132      CONTENTS

  ranging in infrared at the Grasse laser station. Astron. Astrophys. 602:A90,

  DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/201628590, 1704.06443

Damour T (1989) The problem of motion in Newtonian and Einsteinian gravity. In:

  Hawking SW, Israel W (eds) Three Hundred Years of Gravitation, p 128

Damour T (2012) Theoretical aspects of the equivalence principle. Classical and

  Quantum Gravity 29(18):184001, DOI 10.1088/0264-9381/29/18/184001, 1202.

  6311

Damour T, Donoghue JF (2010) Equivalence principle violations and couplings of

  a light dilaton. Phys. Rev. D 82(8):084033, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevD.82.084033,

  1007.2792

Damour T, Donoghue JF (2011) Spatial variation of fundamental couplings and

  lunar laser ranging. Classical and Quantum Gravity 28(16):162001, DOI 10.1088/

  0264-9381/28/16/162001, URL https://doi.org/10.1088%2F0264-9381%2F28%

  2F16%2F162001

Damour T, Esposito-Farese G (1992) Tensor-multi-scalar theories of gravitation.

  Classical and Quantum Gravity 9(9):2093–2176, DOI 10.1088/0264-9381/9/9/

  015, URL https://doi.org/10.1088%2F0264-9381%2F9%2F9%2F015

Damour T, Esposito-Farese G (1993) Nonperturbative strong-field effects in tensor-

  scalar theories of gravitation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 70(15):2220–2223, DOI 10.1103/

  PhysRevLett.70.2220

Damour T, Esposito-Farèse G (1996) Tensor-scalar gravity and binary-pulsar exper-

  iments. Phys. Rev. D 54(2):1474–1491, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevD.54.1474

Damour T, Nordtvedt K (1993) Tensor-scalar cosmological models and their

  relaxation toward general relativity. Phys Rev D 48:3436–3450, DOI 10.1103/

  PhysRevD.48.3436, URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevD.48.3436

Damour T, Polyakov AM (1994) The string dilation and a least coupling

  principle. Nuclear Physics B 423(2):532 – 558, DOI https://doi.org/10.1016/
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                               CONTENTS           133

  0550-3213(94)90143-0, URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/

  0550321394901430

Damour T, Polyakov AM (1994) String theory and gravity. General Relativity and

  Gravitation 26:1171–1176, DOI 10.1007/BF02106709, gr-qc/9411069

Damour T, Vokrouhlický D (1995) Conservation laws for systems of extended bodies

  in the first post-Newtonian approximation. Phys. Rev. D 52(8):4455–4461, DOI

  10.1103/PhysRevD.52.4455, gr-qc/9503041

Damour T, Soffel M, Xu C (1991) General-relativistic celestial mechanics. I. Method

  and definition of reference systems. Phys. Rev. D 43(10):3273–3307, DOI 10.

  1103/PhysRevD.43.3273

Damour T, Piazza F, Veneziano G (2002) Violations of the equivalence principle in

  a dilaton-runaway scenario. Phys. Rev. D 66(4):046007, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevD.

  66.046007, hep-th/0205111

de Felice A, Tsujikawa S (2010) f(R) Theories. Living Reviews in Relativity 13:3–+,

  1002.4928

De Marchi F, Cascioli G (2020) Testing general relativity in the solar system: present

  and future perspectives. Classical and Quantum Gravity 37(9):095007, DOI 10.

  1088/1361-6382/ab6ae0, 1911.05561

De Marchi F, Tommei G, Milani A, Schettino G (2016) Constraining the Nordtvedt

  parameter with the BepiColombo Radioscience experiment. Phys. Rev. D

  93(12):123014, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevD.93.123014, 1605.07822

de Rham C (2014) Massive Gravity. Living Reviews in Relativity 17:7, DOI 10.

  12942/lrr-2014-7, 1401.4173

Deng XM, Xie Y (2012) Two-post-newtonian light propagation in the scalar-tensor

  theory: An n-point mass case. Phys Rev D 86:044007, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevD.

  86.044007, URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevD.86.044007
                      Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


134     CONTENTS

Deram P, Fienga A, Verma AK, Gastineau M, Laskar J (2022) Gaia-DR2 asteroid

  observations and INPOP planetary ephemerides. Celestial Mechanics and Dynam-

  ical Astronomy 134(3):32, DOI 10.1007/s10569-022-10084-6, 2203.01586

Devine CJ, Dunham DW (1966) The ephemerides of the earth-moon barycenter,

  Venus, Mars and Mercury considering the earth and the moon as separate bodies.

  Tech. rep., JPL Technical Memorandum 33-232

Di Ruscio A, Durante D, Iess L (2020a) Mass of the saturnian system from cassini

  tracking data, private communication

Di Ruscio A, Fienga A, Durante D, Iess L, Laskar J, Gastineau M (2020b) Analysis

  of Cassini radio tracking data for the construction of INPOP19a: A new estimate

  of the Kuiper belt mass. Astron. Astrophys. 640:A7, DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/

  202037920

Donivan FF, Newhall XX (1981) Delta VLBI Observations of Mars Viking Lander

  I. In: Bulletin of the American Astronomical Society, Bulletin of the American

  Astronomical Society, vol 13, pp 555–+

Douglas MR, Kachru S (2007) Flux compactification. Rev Mod Phys 79:733–

  796, DOI 10.1103/RevModPhys.79.733, URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/

  RevModPhys.79.733

Durante D, Parisi M, Serra D, Zannoni M, Notaro V, Racioppa P, Buccino DR,

  Lari G, Gomez Casajus L, Iess L, Folkner WM, Tommei G, Tortora P, Bolton

  SJ (2020) Jupiter’s Gravity Field Halfway Through the Juno Mission. Geo-

  phys. Res. Lett.47(4):e86572, DOI 10.1029/2019GL086572

Einstein A (1915) Zur allgemeinen Relativitätstheorie. Sitzungsberichte der

  Königlich Preußischen Akademie der Wissenschaften (Berlin pp 778–786

Einstein A (1918) Prinzipielles zur allgemeinen Relativitätstheorie. Annalen der

  Physik 360(4):241–244, DOI 10.1002/andp.19183600402

Einstein A, Infeld L, B H (1938) Ann Math (39):65
                       Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                              CONTENTS          135

Fey AL, Gordon D, Jacobs CS, Ma C, Gaume RA, Arias EF, Bianco G, Boboltz DA,

  Böckmann S, Bolotin S, Charlot P, Collioud A, Engelhardt G, Gipson J, Gontier

  AM, Heinkelmann R, Kurdubov S, Lambert S, Lytvyn S, MacMillan DS, Malkin

  Z, Nothnagel A, Ojha R, Skurikhina E, Sokolova J, Souchay J, Sovers OJ, Tesmer

  V, Titov O, Wang G, Zharov V (2015) The Second Realization of the Interna-

  tional Celestial Reference Frame by Very Long Baseline Interferometry. Astron. J

  150(2):58, DOI 10.1088/0004-6256/150/2/58

Fienga A, Simon JL (2005) Analytical and numerical studies of asteroid perturbations

  on solar system planet dynamics. Astron. Astrophys. 429:361–367, DOI 10.1051/

  0004-6361:20048159

Fienga A, Manche H, Laskar J, Gastineau M (2008) INPOP06: a new numerical

  planetary ephemeris. Astron. Astrophys. 477:315–327, DOI 10.1051/0004-6361:

  20066607

Fienga A, Laskar J, Morley T, Manche H, Kuchynka P, Le Poncin-Lafitte

  C, Budnik F, Gastineau M, Somenzi L (2009) INPOP08, a 4-D planetary

  ephemeris: from asteroid and time-scale computations to ESA Mars Express and

  Venus Express contributions. Astron. Astrophys. 507:1675–1686, DOI 10.1051/

  0004-6361/200911755, 0906.2860

Fienga A, Laskar J, Kuchynka P, Le Poncin-Lafitte C, Manche H, Gastineau M

  (2010) Gravity tests with INPOP planetary ephemerides. In: Klioner SA, Sei-

  delmann PK, Soffel MH (eds) Relativity in Fundamental Astronomy: Dynamics,

  Reference Frames, and Data Analysis, vol 261, pp 159–169, DOI 10.1017/

  S1743921309990330, 0906.3962

Fienga A, Laskar J, Kuchynka P, Manche H, Desvignes G, Gastineau M, Cognard

  I, Theureau G (2011a) The INPOP10a planetary ephemeris and its applications in

  fundamental physics. Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy 111:363–

  385, DOI 10.1007/s10569-011-9377-8, 1108.5546
                      Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


136     CONTENTS

Fienga A, Laskar J, Manche H, Kuchynka P, Desvignes G, Gastineau M, Cognard I,

  Thereau G (2011b) The planetary ephemerides INPOP10a and its applications in

  fundamental physics. Celest Mech Dyn Astron 111:363–+

Fienga A, Laskar J, Manche H, Gastineau M, Verma A (2014) New INPOP release:

  INPOP13c, URL https://www.imcce.fr/recherche/equipes/asd/inpop/download13c

Fienga A, Laskar J, Exertier P, Manche H, Gastineau M (2015) Numerical estimation

  of the sensitivity of INPOP planetary ephemerides to general relativity parame-

  ters. Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy 123:325–349, DOI 10.1007/

  s10569-015-9639-y

Fienga A, Laskar J, Manche H, Gastineau M (2018) Tests of GR with INPOP15a

  planetary ephemerides: Estimations of possible supplementary advances of per-

  ihelia for Mercury and Saturn. In: Bianchi M, Jansen RT, Ruffini R (eds)

  Fourteenth Marcel Grossmann Meeting - MG14, pp 3694–3695, DOI 10.1142/

  9789813226609\ 0482

Fienga A, Deram P, Viswanathan V, Di Ruscio A, Bernus L, Durante D, Gastineau

  M, Laskar J (2019a) INPOP19a planetary ephemerides. Notes Scientifiques et

  Techniques de l’Institut de Mecanique Celeste 109

Fienga A, Deram P, Viswanathan V, Di Ruscio A, Bernus L, Durante D, Gastineau

  M, Laskar J (2019b) INPOP19a planetary ephemeris. Notes Scientifiques et

  Techniques de l’Institut de Mecanique Celeste 109

Fienga A, Avdellidou C, Hanuš J (2020a) Asteroid masses obtained with INPOP

  planetary ephemerides. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc.492(1):589–602, DOI 10.1093/

  mnras/stz3407

Fienga A, Di Ruscio A, Bernus L, Deram P, Durante D, Laskar J, Iess L (2020b) New

  constraints on the location of P9 obtained with the INPOP19a planetary ephemeris.

  Astron. Astrophys. 640:A6, DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/202037919
                      Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                            CONTENTS         137

Fienga A, Bigot L, Mary D, Deram P, Di Ruscio A, Bernus L, Gastineau M, Laskar

  J (2021a) Evolution of INPOP planetary ephemerides and Bepi-Colombo simula-

  tions. pp 155–158, DOI 10.1017/S1743921321001277, URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/

  2111.04499.pdf, 2111.04499

Fienga A, Deram P, Di Ruscio A, Viswanathan V, Camargo JIB, Bernus L, Gastineau

  M, Laskar J (2021b) INPOP21a planetary ephemerides. Notes Scientifiques et

  Techniques de l’Institut de Mecanique Celeste 110

Fienga A, Bernus L, Minazzoli O, Hees A, Bigot L, Herrera C, Herrera C, Mariani

  V, Di Ruscio A, Mary D (2022) INPOP Planetary ephemerides and applications

  in the frame of the BepiColombo mission including new constraints on the gravi-

  ton mass and dilaton parameters. In: Auge E, Dumarchez J, Tran Thanh Van J

  (eds) Proceedings, 56nd Rencontres de Moriond on Gravitation: La Thuile, Italy,

  January 30- February 6, 2022, ARISF, URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2211.04881

Fischbach E, Gillies GT, Krause DE, Schwan JG, Talmadge C (1992) Non-

  Newtonian Gravity and New Weak Forces: an Index of Measurements and Theory.

  Metrologia 29(3):213–260, DOI 10.1088/0026-1394/29/3/001

Folkner WM, Charlot P, Finger MH, Williams JG, Sovers OJ, Newhall X, Standish

  EM Jr (1994) Determination of the extragalactic-planetary frame tie from joint

  analysis of radio interferometric and lunar laser ranging measurements. Astron.

  Astrophys. 287:279–289

Folkner WM, Williams JG, Boggs DH (2008) Jpl planetary and lunar ephemerides

  DE421, jPL Interoffice Memorandum IOM 343R-08-003

Folkner WM, Williams JG, Boggs DH, Park RS, Kuchynka P (2014a) The Plane-

  tary and Lunar Ephemerides DE430 and DE431. Interplanetary Network Progress

  Report 196:1–81

Folkner WM, Williams JG, Boggs DH, Park RS, Kuchynka P (2014b) The Plane-

  tary and Lunar Ephemerides DE430 and DE431. Interplanetary Network Progress
                       Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


138     CONTENTS

  Report 196:C1

Folkner WM, Williams JG, Boggs DH, Park RS, Kuchynka P (2014c) The Plane-

  tary and Lunar Ephemerides DE430 and DE431. Interplanetary Network Progress

  Report 196:1–81

Freire PCC, Wex N, Esposito-Farèse G, Verbiest JPW, Bailes M, Jacoby BA, Kramer

  M, Stairs IH, Antoniadis J, Janssen GH (2012) The relativistic pulsar-white dwarf

  binary PSR J1738+0333 - II. The most stringent test of scalar-tensor gravity. Mon.

  Not. R. Astron. Soc.423(4):3328–3343, DOI 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2012.21253.x

Frère JM, Ling FS, Vertongen G (2008) Bound on the dark matter density in the

  Solar System from planetary motions. Phys. Rev. D 77(8):083005–+, DOI 10.

  1103/PhysRevD.77.083005, arXiv:astro-ph/0701542

Füzfa A, Alimi JM (2007) Toward a unified description of dark energy and

  dark matter from the abnormally weighting energy hypothesis. Phys. Rev. D

  75(12):123007, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevD.75.123007, astro-ph/0702478

Gaillot A (1888) Theorie analytique du mouvement des planetes.

Gaillot AM, Le Verrier UJ (1913) Addition a la théorie du mouvement de Jupiter de

  Le Verrier : tables rectifiées du mouvement de Jupiter. Annales de l’Observatoire

  de Paris 31:1

Gao S, Wald RM (2000) Theorems on gravitational time delay and related issues.

  Classical and Quantum Gravity 17(24):4999–5008, DOI 10.1088/0264-9381/17/

  24/305, gr-qc/0007021

Genova A, Mazarico E, Goossens S, Lemoine FG, Neumann GA, Smith DE, Zuber

  MT (2018) Solar system expansion and strong equivalence principle as seen by

  the NASA MESSENGER mission. Nature Communications 9:289, DOI 10.1038/

  s41467-017-02558-1

Godun RM, Nisbet-Jones PBR, Jones JM, King SA, Johnson LAM, Margolis

  HS, Szymaniec K, Lea SN, Bongs K, Gill P (2014) Frequency Ratio of Two
                      Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                            CONTENTS          139

  Optical Clock Transitions in 171 Yb+ and Constraints on the Time Variation of

  Fundamental Constants. Physical Review Letters 113(21):210801, DOI 10.1103/

  PhysRevLett.113.210801, 1407.0164

Guena J, Abgrall M, Rovera D, Laurent P, Chupin B, Lours M, Santarelli G, Rosen-

  busch P, Tobar ME, Li R, Gibble K, Clairon A, Bize S (2012) Progress in

  atomic fountains at lne-syrte. IEEE Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics,

  and Frequency Control 59(3):391–409, DOI 10.1109/TUFFC.2012.2208

Guéna J, Abgrall M, Rovera D, Rosenbusch P, Tobar ME, Laurent P, Clairon A,

  Bize S (2012) Improved Tests of Local Position Invariance Using Rb87 and Cs133

  Fountains. Physical Review Letters 109(8):080801, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevLett.

  109.080801, 1205.4235

Hees A, Bertone S, Le Poncin-Lafitte C (2014a) Relativistic formulation of coor-

  dinate light time, Doppler, and astrometric observables up to the second post-

  Minkowskian order. Phys. Rev. D 89(6):064045, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevD.89.

  064045, 1401.7622

Hees A, Folkner WM, Jacobson RA, Park RS (2014b) Constraints on modified

  Newtonian dynamics theories from radio tracking data of the Cassini spacecraft.

  Phys. Rev. D 89(10):102002, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevD.89.102002, 1402.6950

Hees A, Minazzoli O, Savalle E, Stadnik YV, Wolf P (2018) Violation of the

  equivalence principle from light scalar dark matter. Phys. Rev. D 98(6):064051,

  DOI 10.1103/PhysRevD.98.064051, 1807.04512

Hellings RW, Adams PJ, Anderson JD, Keesey MS, Lau EL, Standish J E M,

  Canuto VM, Goldman I (1983) Experimental Test of the Variability of G Using

  Viking Lander Ranging Data. Phys. Rev. Lett. 51(18):1609–1612, DOI 10.1103/

  PhysRevLett.51.1609

Hinterbichler K, Khoury J (2010) Screening Long-Range Forces through Local Sym-

  metry Restoration. Phys. Rev. Lett. 104(23):231301, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevLett.
                       Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


140      CONTENTS

  104.231301, 1001.4525

Huntemann N, Lipphardt B, Tamm C, Gerginov V, Weyers S, Peik E (2014) Improved

  Limit on a Temporal Variation of mp /me from Comparisons of Yb+ and Cs Atomic

  Clocks. Physical Review Letters 113(21):210802, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevLett.113.

  210802, 1407.4408

Imperi L, Iess L, Mariani MJ (2018) An analysis of the geodesy and relativity

  experiments of BepiColombo. Icarus 301:9025, DOI 10.1016/j.icarus.2017.09.008

Iorio L (2009) The Recently Determined Anomalous Perihelion Precession of Saturn.

  Astron. J 137(3):3615–3618, DOI 10.1088/0004-6256/137/3/3615, 0811.0756

Iorio L (2010) The Perihelion Precession of Saturn, Planet X/Nemesis and MOND.

  The Open Astronomy Journal 3:1–6, DOI 10.2174/1874381101003010001, 0907.

  4514

Iorio L, Lichtenegger HIM, Ruggiero ML, Corda C (2011) Phenomenology of the

  Lense-Thirring effect in the solar system. Ap&SS 331(2):351–395, DOI 10.1007/

  s10509-010-0489-5, 1009.3225

Ivashkin VV (2021) The Influence of the Earth’s Oblateness on the Energy Integral

  and Some Characteristics of a Spacecraft’s Orbit. Cosmic Research 59(5):324–

  327, DOI 10.1134/S001095252105004X

Jackson JD (1998) Classical Electrodynamics, 3rd Edition

Jacobson R (2021a) The orbits of the major saturnian satellites,the trajectories of

  spacecraft at saturn, the gravity field of the saturnian system, and the orientation

  of saturn’s pole, private communication to Horizon/NAIF/Dragonfly

Jacobson R (2021b) The orbits of the regular jovian satellites and the orientation of

  the pole of jupiter, private communication to Horizon/NAIF

Jacobson RA (2009) The Orbits of the Neptunian Satellites and the Orientation of

  the Pole of Neptune. Astron. J 137(5):4322–4329, DOI 10.1088/0004-6256/137/

  5/4322
                       Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                             CONTENTS          141

Jacobson RA (2014) The Orbits of the Uranian Satellites and Rings, the Gravity

  Field of the Uranian System, and the Orientation of the Pole of Uranus. Astron. J

  148(5):76, DOI 10.1088/0004-6256/148/5/76

Jones D, Folkner W, Park R, Jacobs C, romney J, Dhawan V (2019) Constraining

  Jupiter’s Orbit with VLBA Astrometry of Juno. In: American Astronomical Soci-

  ety Meeting Abstracts #233, American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts,

  vol 233, p 302.01

Jones DL, Fomalont E, Dhawan V, Romney J, Folkner WM, Lanyi G, Border J,

  Jacobson RA (2011) Very Long Baseline Array Astrometric Observations of the

  Cassini Spacecraft at Saturn. Astron J 141:29–+, DOI 10.1088/0004-6256/141/2/

  29, 1012.0264

Kardashev NS, Tutukov AV, Fedorova AV (2005) Limits on the Mass of Dark Mat-

  ter in the Sun from a Model for the Modern Sun and Its Previous Evolution.

  Astronomy Reports 49(2):134–143, DOI 10.1134/1.1862360

Kaula WM (1966) Theory of satellite geodesy. Applications of satellites to geodesy

Khoury J, Weltman A (2004) Chameleon cosmology. Phys. Rev. D 69(4):044026,

  DOI 10.1103/PhysRevD.69.044026, astro-ph/0309411

Khriplovich IB, Pitjeva EV (2006) Upper Limits on Density of Dark Matter in Solar

  System. International Journal of Modern Physics D 15(4):615–618, DOI 10.1142/

  S0218271806008462, astro-ph/0601422

Klioner S, Soffel M (1993) Note on the influence of dark matter on the motion of

  the solar system. Physics Letters A 184(1):41–44, DOI 10.1016/0375-9601(93)

  90343-X

Klioner SA (2008) Relativistic scaling of astronomical quantities and the system of

  astronomical units. Astron. Astrophys. 478(3):951–958, DOI 10.1051/0004-6361:

  20077786
                         Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


142     CONTENTS

Klioner SA (2016) Parametrized post-Newtonian equations of motion of N mass

  monopoles with the SEP violation. arXiv e-prints arXiv:1607.00183, 1607.00183

Klioner SA, Kopeikin SM (1992) Microarcsecond Astrometry in Space: Relativistic

  Effects and Reduction of Observations. Astron. J 104:897, DOI 10.1086/116284

Klioner SA, Soffel MH (2000) Relativistic celestial mechanics with PPN parameters.

  Phys. Rev. D 62(2):024019, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevD.62.024019, gr-qc/9906123

Konopliv AS, Banerdt WB, Sjogren WL (1999) Venus Gravity: 180th Degree and

  Order Model. Icarus 139(1):3–18, DOI 10.1006/icar.1999.6086

Konopliv AS, Yoder CF, Standish EM, Yuan DN, Sjogren WL (2006) A global solu-

  tion for the Mars static and seasonal gravity, Mars orientation, Phobos and Deimos

  masses, and Mars ephemeris. Icarus 182:23–50, DOI 10.1016/j.icarus.2005.12.025

Konopliv AS, Asmar SW, Folkner WM, Karatekin Ö, Nunes DC, Smrekar SE, Yoder

  CF, Zuber MT (2011) Mars high resolution gravity fields from MRO, Mars sea-

  sonal gravity, and other dynamical parameters. Icarus 211:401–428, DOI 10.1016/

  j.icarus.2010.10.004

Konopliv AS, Park RS, Folkner WM (2016) An improved JPL Mars gravity field

  and orientation from Mars orbiter and lander tracking data. Icarus 274:253–260,

  DOI 10.1016/j.icarus.2016.02.052

Konopliv AS, Park RS, Ermakov AI (2020) The Mercury gravity field, orientation,

  love number, and ephemeris from the MESSENGER radiometric tracking data.

  Icarus 335:113386, DOI 10.1016/j.icarus.2019.07.020

Kopeikin S, Vlasov I (2004) Parametrized post-Newtonian theory of reference

  frames, multipolar expansions and equations of motion in the N-body prob-

  lem. Phys. Rep.400(4-6):209–318, DOI 10.1016/j.physrep.2004.08.004, gr-qc/

  0403068

Kopeikin SM (2012) Celestial ephemerides in an expanding universe. Phys. Rev. D

  86(6):064004, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevD.86.064004
                       Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                              CONTENTS          143

Kopeikin SM (2019) Covariant equations of motion of extended bodies with arbitrary

  mass and spin multipoles. Phys. Rev. D 99(8):084008, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevD.

  99.084008

Kramer M, Stairs IH, Manchester RN, Wex N, Deller AT, Coles WA, Ali M, Bur-

  gay M, Camilo F, Cognard I, Damour T, Desvignes G, Ferdman RD, Freire PCC,

  Grondin S, Guillemot L, Hobbs GB, Janssen G, Karuppusamy R, Lorimer DR,

  Lyne AG, McKee JW, McLaughlin M, Münch LE, Perera BBP, Pol N, Possenti

  A, Sarkissian J, Stappers BW, Theureau G (2021) Strong-Field Gravity Tests with

  the Double Pulsar. Physical Review X 11(4):041050, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevX.11.

  041050

Krasinskii GA, Pit’eva EV, Sveshnikov ML, Chuniaeva LI (1993) The motion

  of major planets from observations 1769 1988 and some astronomical con-

  stants. Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy 55(1):1–23, DOI 10.1007/

  BF00694392

Krasinsky GA, Brumberg VA (2004) Secular increase of astronomical unit from anal-

  ysis of the major planet motions, and its interpretation. Celestial Mechanics and

  Dynamical Astronomy 90(3-4):267–288, DOI 10.1007/s10569-004-0633-z

Krasinsky GA, Novikov FA, Scripnichenko VI (1988) Problem oriented language

  for ephemeris astronomy and its realisation in the system era. Celestial Mechanics

  45(1-3):219–229, DOI 10.1007/BF01229005

Krasinsky GA, Pitjeva EV, Vasilyev MV, Yagudina EI (2002) Hidden Mass in the

  Asteroid Belt. Icarus 158:98–105, DOI 10.1006/icar.2002.6837

Kuchynka P, Folkner WM (2013) A new approach to determining asteroid masses

  from planetary range measurements. Icarus 222(1):243–253, DOI 10.1016/j.

  icarus.2012.11.003

Kuchynka P, Laskar J, Fienga A, Manche H (2010) A ring as a model of the main belt

  in planetary ephemerides. Astron. Astrophys. 514:A96, DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


144      CONTENTS

  200913346, 1004.3119

Kuchynka P, Folkner W, Konopliv A (2012) Station-specific errors in mars ranging

  measurements. Tech. rep., IPN Progress Report

Lecian OM, Montani G (2009) Implications of non-analytic f(R) gravity at solar

  system scales. Classical and Quantum Gravity 26(4):045014, DOI 10.1088/

  0264-9381/26/4/045014, 0807.4428

Leefer N, Weber CTM, Cingöz A, Torgerson JR, Budker D (2013) New Limits

  on Variation of the Fine-Structure Constant Using Atomic Dysprosium. Physi-

  cal Review Letters 111(6):060801, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevLett.111.060801, 1304.

  6940

Linet B, Teyssandier P (2013) New method for determining the light travel time in

  static, spherically symmetric spacetimes. Calculation of the terms of order G3 .

  Classical and Quantum Gravity 30(17):175008, DOI 10.1088/0264-9381/30/17/

  175008, 1304.3683

Linet B, Teyssandier P (2016) Time transfer functions in Schwarzschild-like met-

  rics in the weak-field limit: A unified description of Shapiro and lensing effects.

  Phys. Rev. D 93(4):044028, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevD.93.044028, 1511.04284

Lorentz HA, Droste J (1917a) Versl K Akad Wet Amsterdam (26):392

Lorentz HA, Droste J (1917b) Versl K Akad Wet Amsterdam (26):649

Lorentz HA, Droste J (1937) The Motion of a System of Bodies under the Influence

  of their Mutual Attraction, According to Einstein’s Theory, Springer Nether-

  lands, Dordrecht, pp 330–355. DOI 10.1007/978-94-015-3445-1 11, URL https:

  //doi.org/10.1007/978-94-015-3445-1 11

Lundberg J, Edsjö J (2004) Weakly interacting massive particle diffusion in the solar

  system including solar depletion and its effect on Earth capture rates. Phys. Rev. D

  69(12):123505, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevD.69.123505, astro-ph/0401113
                         Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                               CONTENTS          145

Luzum B, Capitaine N, Fienga A, Folkner W, Fukushima T, Hilton J, Hohenkerk C,

  Krasinsky G, Petit G, Pitjeva E, Soffel M, Wallace P (2011) The IAU 2009 sys-

  tem of astronomical constants: the report of the IAU working group on numerical

  standards for Fundamental Astronomy. Celest Mech Dyn Astron 110:293–304,

  DOI 10.1007/s10569-011-9352-4

Ma C, Arias EF, Eubanks TM, Fey AL, Gontier AM, Jacobs CS, Sovers OJ, Archinal

  BA, Charlot P (1998) The International Celestial Reference Frame as Realized

  by Very Long Baseline Interferometry. Astron. J 116(1):516–546, DOI 10.1086/

  300408

Magueijo J, Bekenstein J (2007) Testing strong MOND behavior in the solar sys-

  tem. International Journal of Modern Physics D 16(12a):2035–2053, DOI 10.1142/

  S021827180701153X, URL https://doi.org/10.1142/S021827180701153X, https:

  //doi.org/10.1142/S021827180701153X

Manche H (2011) Modele dynamique des ephemerides inpop et ajuste-

  ment     aux   donnees    LLR.   PhD    thesis,   Observatoire   de   Paris,   URL

  https://www.imcce.fr/content/medias/publications/publications-recherche/

  theses-habilitations/docs/Manche These.pdf

Mariani V, Fienga A, Minazzoli O, Gastineau M, Laskar J (2023) Bayesian test of the

  mass of the graviton with planetary ephemerides. arXiv e-prints arXiv:2306.07069,

  DOI 10.48550/arXiv.2306.07069, 2306.07069

McMillan PJ (2011) Mass models of the Milky Way. Monthly Notices of the Royal

  Astronomical Society 414(3):2446–2457, DOI 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.18564.

  x, URL https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.18564.x, https://academic.oup.

  com/mnras/article-pdf/414/3/2446/3525100/mnras0414-2446.pdf

Merkowitz SM (2010) Tests of Gravity Using Lunar Laser Ranging. Living Reviews

  in Relativity 13:7–+
                       Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


146     CONTENTS

Milani A, Vokrouhlický D, Villani D, Bonanno C, Rossi A (2002) Testing gen-

  eral relativity with the BepiColombo radio science experiment. Phys. Rev. D

  66(8):082001, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevD.66.082001

Milgrom M (1983) A modification of the Newtonian dynamics as a possible

  alternative to the hidden mass hypothesis. ApJ 270:365–370, DOI 10.1086/161130

Milgrom M (2009) MOND effects in the inner Solar system. Monthly Notices

  of the Royal Astronomical Society 399(1):474–486, DOI 10.1111/j.1365-2966.

  2009.15302.x, URL https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2966.2009.15302.x, https://

  academic.oup.com/mnras/article-pdf/399/1/474/3820855/mnras0399-0474.pdf

Milgrom M (2010) Quasi-linear formulation of MOND. Mon. Not. R. Astron.

  Soc.403(2):886–895, DOI 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2009.16184.x, 0911.5464

Milgrom M (2014) The MOND paradigm of modified dynamics. Scholarpedia

  9(6):31410, DOI 10.4249/scholarpedia.31410, revision #197699

Minazzoli O (2012) 2PN/RM gauge invariance in Brans-Dicke-like scalar-tensor the-

  ories. Classical and Quantum Gravity 29(23):237002, DOI 10.1088/0264-9381/

  29/23/237002, 1210.3073

Minazzoli O, Chauvineau B (2011) Scalar-tensor propagation of light in the inner

  solar system including relevant c−4 contributions for ranging and time trans-

  fer. Classical and Quantum Gravity 28(8):085010, DOI 10.1088/0264-9381/28/8/

  085010, 1007.3942

Minazzoli O, Hees A (2013) Intrinsic Solar System decoupling of a scalar-tensor the-

  ory with a universal coupling between the scalar field and the matter Lagrangian.

  Phys. Rev. D 88(4):041504, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevD.88.041504, 1308.2770

Minazzoli O, Hees A (2016) Dilatons with intrinsic decouplings. Phys Rev D

  94:064038, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevD.94.064038, URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.

  1103/PhysRevD.94.064038
                       Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                              CONTENTS           147

Minazzoli O, Johnson-McDaniel NK, Sakellariadou M (2019) Shortcomings of

  shapiro delay-based tests of the equivalence principle on cosmological scales. Phys

  Rev D 100:104047, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevD.100.104047, URL https://link.aps.

  org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevD.100.104047

Misner CW, Thorne KS, Wheeler JA (1973) Gravitation

Moskovitz NA, Wasserman L, Burt B, Schottland R, Bowell E, Bailen M, Granvik

  M (2022) The astorb database at Lowell Observatory. Astronomy and Computing

  41:100661, DOI 10.1016/j.ascom.2022.100661, 2210.10217

Moyer T (1971) DPODP manual. IOM 3215-37, JPL

Moyer T (2000) Formulation for observed and computed values of deep space

  network data types for navigation. Monography of DEEP SPACE COMMUNICA-

  TIONS AND NAVIGATION Series 2, JPL

Murphy TW, Adelberger EG, Battat JBR, Carey LN, Hoyle CD, Leblanc P,

  Michelsen EL, Nordtvedt K, Orin AE, Strasburg JD, Stubbs CW, Swanson HE,

  Williams E (2008) The Apache Point Observatory Lunar Laser-ranging Opera-

  tion: Instrument Description and First Detections. PASP 120:20–37, DOI 10.1086/

  526428, 0710.0890

Nelson RA, Ely TA (2006) Relativistic transformations for time synchronization and

  dissemination in the solar system

Newhall XX, Standish J E M, Williams JG (1983) DE 102: a numerically inte-

  grated ephemeris of the moon and planets spanning forty-four centuries. Astron.

  Astrophys. 125(1):150–167

Ni WT, Zimmermann M (1978) Inertial and gravitational effects in the proper ref-

  erence frame of an accelerated, rotating observer. Phys. Rev. D 17(6):1473–1476,

  DOI 10.1103/PhysRevD.17.1473

Nitti F (2022) Notes on the mass of bound objects. Private communication
                       Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


148     CONTENTS

Nitti F, Piazza F (2012) Scalar-tensor theories, trace anomalies, and the qcd frame.

  Phys Rev D 86:122002, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevD.86.122002, URL https://link.aps.

  org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevD.86.122002

Noether E (1918) Invariant Variation Problems. Nachr D KÃ¶nig Gesellsch D Wiss

  Zu GÃ¶ttingen pp 235–237

Nordtvedt K (1968a) Equivalence principle for massive bodies. i. phenomenology.

  Phys Rev 169:1014–1016, DOI 10.1103/PhysRev.169.1014, URL https://link.aps.

  org/doi/10.1103/PhysRev.169.1014

Nordtvedt K (1968b) Equivalence principle for massive bodies. ii. theory. Phys Rev

  169:1017–1025, DOI 10.1103/PhysRev.169.1017, URL https://link.aps.org/doi/

  10.1103/PhysRev.169.1017

Nordtvedt KL (1994) Cosmic acceleration of Earth and the Moon by dark matter.

  Astrophys J 437:529–531, DOI 10.1086/175016

Overduin JM, Wesson PS (1997) Kaluza-Klein gravity. Phys. Rep.283(5):303–378,

  DOI 10.1016/S0370-1573(96)00046-4, gr-qc/9805018

Page GL, Wallin JF, Dixon DS (2009) How Well do We Know the Orbits of

  the Outer Planets? ApJ 697(2):1226–1241, DOI 10.1088/0004-637X/697/2/1226,

  0905.0030

Park RS, Folkner WM, Konopliv AS, Williams JG, Smith DE, Zuber MT (2017) Pre-

  cession of Mercury’s Perihelion from Ranging to the MESSENGER Spacecraft.

  Astron. J 153(3):121, DOI 10.3847/1538-3881/aa5be2

Park RS, Folkner WM, Williams JG, Boggs DH (2021) The JPL Planetary and Lunar

  Ephemerides DE440 and DE441. Astron. J 161(3):105, DOI 10.3847/1538-3881/

  abd414

Pavlov D (2020) Role of lunar laser ranging in realization of terrestrial, lunar,

  and ephemeris reference frames. Journal of Geodesy 94(1):5, DOI 10.1007/

  s00190-019-01333-y, 1911.08235
                       Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                               CONTENTS          149

Petit G, Luzum B (2010) IERS Conventions (2010). IERS Technical Note 36:1

Pijpers FP (1998) Helioseismic determination of the solar gravitational quadrupole

  moment. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc.297(3):L76–L80, DOI 10.1046/j.1365-8711.

  1998.01801.x, astro-ph/9804258

Pinto RF, Brun AS, Jouve L, Grappin R (2011) Coupling the Solar Dynamo and the

  Corona: Wind Properties, Mass, and Momentum Losses during an Activity Cycle.

  Astrophys J 737:72, DOI 10.1088/0004-637X/737/2/72, 1106.0882

Pitjeva EV (1993) Experimental testing of relativistic effects, variability of the

  gravitational constant and topography of Mercury surface from radar observa-

  tions 1964 1989. Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy 55(4):313–321,

  DOI 10.1007/BF00692991

Pitjeva EV (2001) Modern Numerical Ephemerides of Planets and the Importance

  of Ranging Observations for Their Creation. Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical

  Astronomy 80:249–271

Pitjeva EV (2005a) High-Precision Ephemerides of Planets:EPM and Determination

  of Some Astronomical Constants. Solar System Research 39(3):176–186, DOI 10.

  1007/s11208-005-0033-2

Pitjeva EV (2005b) Relativistic Effects and Solar Oblateness from Radar Observa-

  tions of Planets and Spacecraft. Astronomy Letters 31(5):340–349, DOI 10.1134/

  1.1922533

Pitjeva EV, Pitjev NP (2012) Changes in the Sun’s mass and gravitational con-

  stant estimated using modern observations of planets and spacecraft. Solar System

  Research 46(1):78–87, DOI 10.1134/S0038094612010054, 1108.0246

Pitjeva EV, Pitjev NP (2013) Relativistic effects and dark matter in the Solar system

  from observations of planets and spacecraft. Mon Not R stron Soc 432:3431–3437,

  DOI 10.1093/Mon.Not.R.Astron.Soc./stt695, 1306.3043
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


150      CONTENTS

Pitjeva EV, Pitjev NP (2014) Development of planetary ephemerides EPM and their

  applications. Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy 119(3-4):237–256,

  DOI 10.1007/s10569-014-9569-0

Pitjeva EV, Pitjev NP (2018) Mass of the Kuiper belt. Celestial Mechanics and

  Dynamical Astronomy 130(9):57, DOI 10.1007/s10569-018-9853-5, 1810.09771

Pitjeva EV, Pitjev NP (2020) Masses of the Trojan Groups of Jupiter. Astronomy

  Letters 45(12):855–860, DOI 10.1134/S1063773719120041

Pitjeva EV, Pitjev NP, Pavlov DA, Turygin CC (2021) Estimates of the change rate of

  solar mass and gravitational constant based on the dynamics of the Solar System.

  Astron. Astrophys. 647:A141, DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/202039893, 2201.09804

Press WH, Spergel DN (1985) Capture by the sun of a galactic population of weakly

  interacting, massive particles. ApJ 296:679–684, DOI 10.1086/163485

Proca A (1936) Sur la théorie ondulatoire des électrons positifs et négatifs. J Phys

  Radium 7 7:347–353

Rosenband T, Hume DB, Schmidt PO, Chou CW, Brusch A, Lorini L, Oskay WH,

  Drullinger RE, Fortier TM, Stalnaker JE, Diddams SA, Swann WC, Newbury

  NR, Itano WM, Wineland DJ, Bergquist JC (2008) Frequency Ratio of Al+ and

  Hg+ Single-Ion Optical Clocks; Metrology at the 17th Decimal Place. Science

  319:1808–, DOI 10.1126/science.1154622

Sereno M, Jetzer P (2006) Dark matter versus modifications of the gravitational

  inverse-square law: results from planetary motion in the Solar system. Mon.

  Not. R. Astron. Soc.371(2):626–632, DOI 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2006.10670.x,

  astro-ph/0606197

Shapiro II (1964) Fourth Test of General Relativity. Physical Review Letters 13:789–

  791, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevLett.13.789

Sharma J, Ratanpal BS, Pirzada UM, Shah V (2016) Motion of Satellite under

  the Effect of Oblateness of Earth and Atmospheric Drag. arXiv e-prints
                      Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                             CONTENTS          151

  arXiv:1610.02156, DOI 10.48550/arXiv.1610.02156, 1610.02156

Skordis C, Złośnik T (2021) New relativistic theory for modified newtonian dynam-

  ics. Phys Rev Lett 127:161302, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevLett.127.161302, URL

  https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.127.161302

Smith DE, Zuber MT, Mazarico E, Genova A, Neumann GA, Sun X, Torrence MH,

  Mao Dd (2018) Trilogy, a planetary geodesy mission concept for measuring the

  expansion of the solar system. Planet. Space Sci. 153:127–133, DOI 10.1016/j.pss.

  2018.02.003

Soffel M (2003) The IAU 2000 Resolutions for Astrometry, Celestial Mechanics, and

  Metrology in the Relativistic Framework: Explanatory Supplement. Astronomical

  Journal 126:2686–2706

Stairs IH (2003) Testing General Relativity with Pulsar Timing. Living Reviews in

  Relativity 6(1):4, DOI 10.12942/lrr-2003-5

Standish J E M (1983) The JPL “long ephemeris”, DE102/LE51. In: Markellos VV,

  Kozai Y (eds) IAU Colloq. 74: Dynamical Trapping and Evolution in the Solar

  System, Astrophysics and Space Science Library, vol 106, pp 47–50, DOI 10.1007/

  978-94-009-7214-8 5

Standish J E M (1990) The observational basis for JPL’s DE 200, the planetary

  ephemerides of the Astronomical Almanac. Astron. Astrophys. 233:252–271

Standish J E M (1995) Planetary ephemerides DE403. Tech. Rep. 314.10-127, JPL

Standish J E M (1998a) Jpl planetary and lunar ephemerides DE405, jPL Interoffice

  Memorandum IOM 312.F-98-048

Standish J E M (1998b) Linking the Dynamical Reference Frame to the ICRF.

  Highlights of Astronomy 11:310–+

Standish J E M (2001) The JPL DE405 planetary and lunar ephemerides
                      Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


152     CONTENTS

Standish J E M (2010) Testing alternate gravitational theories. In: Klioner SA,

  Seidelmann PK, Soffel MH (eds) Relativity in Fundamental Astronomy: Dynam-

  ics, Reference Frames, and Data Analysis, vol 261, pp 179–182, DOI 10.1017/

  S1743921309990354

Standish J E M, Fienga A (2002) Accuracy limit of modern ephemerides imposed

  by the uncertainties in asteroid masses. Astron. Astrophys. 384:322–328, DOI 10.

  1051/0004-6361:20011821

Standish J E M, Keesey MSW, Newhall XX (1976) JPL development ephemeris 96.

  Tech. Rep. 32-1603, JPL

Steinhardt PJ, Wesley D (2009) Dark energy, inflation, and extra dimensions.

  Phys. Rev. D 79(10):104026–+, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevD.79.104026, 0811.1614

Touboul P, Métris G, Rodrigues M, Bergé J, Robert A, Baghi Q, André Y, Bedouet

  J, Boulanger D, Bremer S, Carle P, Chhun R, Christophe B, Cipolla V, Damour

  T, Danto P, Demange L, Dittus H, Dhuicque O, Fayet P, Foulon B, Guidotti

  PY, Hagedorn D, Hardy E, Huynh PA, Kayser P, Lala S, Lämmerzahl C, Lebat

  V, Liorzou F, List M, Löffler F, Panet I, Pernot-Borràs M, Perraud L, Pires S,

  Pouilloux B, Prieur P, Rebray A, Reynaud S, Rievers B, Selig H, Serron L,

  Sumner T, Tanguy N, Torresi P, Visser P (2022) Result of the MICROSCOPE

  weak equivalence principle test. Classical and Quantum Gravity 39(20):204009,

  DOI 10.1088/1361-6382/ac84be, 2209.15488

Turyshev SG, Toth VT (2010) The Pioneer Anomaly. Living Reviews in Relativity

  13(1):4, DOI 10.12942/lrr-2010-4, 1001.3686

Turyshev SG, Toth VT, Kinsella G, Lee SC, Lok SM, Ellis J (2012) Support for

  the Thermal Origin of the Pioneer Anomaly. Phys. Rev. Lett. 108(24):241101,

  DOI 10.1103/PhysRevLett.108.241101, 1204.2507

Turyshev SG, Toth VT, Sazhin MV (2013a) General relativistic observables of the

  GRAIL mission. Phys. Rev. D 87(2):024020, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevD.87.024020,

  1212.0232
                       Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                             CONTENTS          153

Turyshev SG, Williams JG, Folkner WM, Gutt GM, Baran RT, Hein RC, Somaward-

  hana RP, Lipa JA, Wang S (2013b) Corner-cube retro-reflector instrument for

  advanced lunar laser ranging. Experimental Astronomy 36(1-2):105–135, DOI 10.

  1007/s10686-012-9324-z, 1210.7857

Uzan JP (2003) Tests of Gravity on Astrophysical Scales and Variation of the

  Constants. Annales Henri Poincaré 4:347–369, DOI 10.1007/s00023-003-0927-9

Uzan JP (2011) Varying Constants, Gravitation and Cosmology. Living Reviews in

  Relativity 14(1):2, DOI 10.12942/lrr-2011-2, 1009.5514

Vainshtein AI (1972) To the problem of nonvanishing gravitation mass. Physics

  Letters B 39:393–394, DOI 10.1016/0370-2693(72)90147-5

van der Zwaard R, Dirkx D (2022) The Influence of Dynamic Solar Oblateness on

  Tracking Data Analysis from Past and Future Mercury Missions. Remote Sensing

  14(17):4139, DOI 10.3390/rs14174139

Verdet JP (1990) Une histoire de l’astronomie

Verma AK, Fienga A, Laskar J, Issautier K, Manche H, Gastineau M (2013) Electron

  density distribution and solar plasma correction of radio signals using MGS, MEX,

  and VEX spacecraft navigation data and its application to planetary ephemerides.

  Astron. Astrophys. 550:A124, DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/201219883, 1206.5667

Verma AK, Fienga A, Laskar J, Manche H, Gastineau M (2014) Use of MES-

  SENGER radioscience data to improve planetary ephemeris and to test general

  relativity. Astron. Astrophys. , 561:A115, DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/201322124,

  1306.5569

Viswanathan V, Fienga A, Gastineau M, Laskar J (2017) INPOP17a planetary

  ephemerides. Notes Scientifiques et Techniques de l’Institut de Mecanique Celeste

  108, last Accessed: 2018-11-13

Viswanathan V, Fienga A, Minazzoli O, Bernus L, Laskar J, Gastineau M (2018) The

  new lunar ephemeris INPOP17a and its application to fundamental physics. Mon.
                       Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


154     CONTENTS

  Not. R. Astron. Soc.476:1877–1888, DOI 10.1093/mnras/sty096, 1710.09167

Voisin G, Cognard I, Freire PCC, Wex N, Guillemot L, Desvignes G, Kramer M,

  Theureau G (2020) An improved test of the strong equivalence principle with

  the pulsar in a triple star system. Astron. Astrophys. 638:A24, DOI 10.1051/

  0004-6361/202038104

Wagoner RV (1970) Scalar-Tensor Theory and Gravitational Waves. Phys. Rev. D

  1(12):3209–3216, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevD.1.3209

Wald RM (1984) General Relativity

Wardana, M Dafa, Wulandari, Hesti, Sulistiyowati, Khatami, Akbar H (2020) Deter-

  mination of the local dark matter density using k-dwarfs from gaia dr2. EPJ Web

  Conf 240:04002, DOI 10.1051/epjconf/202024004002, URL https://doi.org/10.

  1051/epjconf/202024004002

Weber, M, de Boer, W (2010) Determination of the local dark matter density in our

  galaxy. A&A 509:A25, DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/200913381, URL https://doi.org/

  10.1051/0004-6361/200913381

Will CM (1998) Bounding the mass of the graviton using gravitational-wave obser-

  vations of inspiralling compact binaries. Phys. Rev. D 57(4):2061–2068, DOI 10.

  1103/PhysRevD.57.2061, gr-qc/9709011

Will CM (2014) The Confrontation between General Relativity and Experiment.

  Living Reviews in Relativity 17(1):4, DOI 10.12942/lrr-2014-4, 1403.7377

Will CM (2018) New General Relativistic Contribution to Mercury’s Perihe-

  lion Advance. Phys. Rev. Lett. 120(19):191101, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevLett.120.

  191101, 1802.05304

Will CM (2018a) Solar system versus gravitational-wave bounds on the graviton

  mass. Classical and Quantum Gravity 35(17):17LT01, URL http://stacks.iop.org/

  0264-9381/35/i=17/a=17LT01
                      Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                             CONTENTS          155

Will CM (2018b) Theory and Experiment in Gravitational Physics, 2nd edn. Cam-

  bridge University Press, DOI 10.1017/9781316338612

Williams JG (1984) Determining asteroid masses from perturbations on Mars. Icarus

  57:1–13, DOI 10.1016/0019-1035(84)90002-2

Williams JG, Turyshev SG, Boggs DH (2012) Lunar laser ranging tests of the equiv-

  alence principle. Classical and Quantum Gravity 29(18):184004, DOI 10.1088/

  0264-9381/29/18/184004, 1203.2150

Zhu WW, Stairs IH, Demorest PB, Nice DJ, Ellis JA, Ransom SM, Arzoumanian

  Z, Crowter K, Dolch T, Ferdman RD, Fonseca E, Gonzalez ME, Jones G, Jones

  ML, Lam MT, Levin L, McLaughlin MA, Pennucci T, Stovall K, Swiggum J

  (2015) Testing Theories of Gravitation Using 21-Year Timing of Pulsar Binary

  J1713+0747. ApJ 809(1):41, DOI 10.1088/0004-637X/809/1/41, 1504.00662

Zhu WW, Desvignes G, Wex N, Caballero RN, Champion DJ, Demorest PB,

  Ellis JA, Janssen GH, Kramer M, Krieger A, Lentati L, Nice DJ, Ransom

  SM, Stairs IH, Stappers BW, Verbiest JPW, Arzoumanian Z, Bassa CG, Bur-

  gay M, Cognard I, Crowter K, Dolch T, Ferdman RD, Fonseca E, Gonzalez

  ME, Graikou E, Guillemot L, Hessels JWT, Jessner A, Jones G, Jones ML, Jor-

  dan C, Karuppusamy R, Lam MT, Lazaridis K, Lazarus P, Lee KJ, Levin L,

  Liu K, Lyne AG, McKee JW, McLaughlin MA, Osłowski S, Pennucci T, Per-

  rodin D, Possenti A, Sanidas S, Shaifullah G, Smits R, Stovall K, Swiggum J,

  Theureau G, Tiburzi C (2018) Tests of gravitational symmetries with pulsar binary

  J1713+0747. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 482(3):3249–

  3260, DOI 10.1093/mnras/sty2905, URL https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/sty2905,

  https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-pdf/482/3/3249/26653488/sty2905.pdf

Zschocke S (2016) Light propagation in the gravitational field of one arbitrarily

  moving pointlike body in the 2pn approximation. Phys Rev D 94:124007, DOI

  10.1103/PhysRevD.94.124007, URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevD.

  94.124007
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


156      CONTENTS

Zschocke S (2022) Light propagation in 2PN approximation in the monopole

  and quadrupole field of a body at rest: Initial value problem. Phys. Rev. D

  105(2):024040, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevD.105.024040, 2201.06296




A Derivation of the Shapiro delay at the c−4 level, and
      related issues

In the following lines, we indicate some arguments stressing the complexity of keep-

ing a consistent framework for the derivation of the Shapiro delay at the c−4 level in

the general data analysis framework of planetary ephemerides.

   Indeed, although there are several c−4 formulae given in the literature already,

e.g. Ashby and Bertotti (2010); Deng and Xie (2012); Linet and Teyssandier (2013);

Hees et al. (2014a); Linet and Teyssandier (2016); Cappuccio et al. (2021); Zschocke

(2022), most of them are not consistent with the coordinate system recommanded

by the IAU—the harmonic gauge—that is used in planetary ephemerides in order

to describe the motion of celestial bodies. Hence, one still has to convert those

propagation time formulae in the harmonic coordinate system. For instance, many

c−4 Shapiro equations are derived from an isotropic metric Ashby and Bertotti

(2010); Linet and Teyssandier (2013); Hees et al. (2014a); Linet and Teyssandier

(2016); Cappuccio et al. (2021), whereas the metric in harmonic coordinates is not

isotropic at the full c−4 level, even for a spherical object at the center of the coor-

dinate system—see, e.g., Minazzoli (2012) for the difference between harmonic and

isotropic coordinate metrics at the c−4 level in the framework of general relativity and

scalar-tensor theories. A second order (c−4 ) propagation time formula with harmonic

coordinates has recently been derived in Zschocke (2022), but it assumes general rel-

ativity and a single body at rest. In general, most of the propagation time formulae in

the literature indeed simplify the problem by assuming staticity of the celestial bodies
                                  Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


                                                                                          CONTENTS                  157

during the propagation of light, whereas one may have to go beyond this approxima-

tion at the required level of accuracy Bertone et al. (2014); Zschocke (2016). A c−4

propagation formula in harmonic coordinates40 for light in the solar system—that is,

with many moving bodies—has been derived in Minazzoli and Chauvineau (2011);

Deng and Xie (2012) in the framework of general relativity and scalar-tensor theories,

but the actual propagation time that results from it remains to be derived. Otherwise,

a c−4 propagation time formula for light rays in harmonic coordinates, but restricted

to one arbitrarely moving pointlike body, has been derived in Zschocke (2016).




   40
      Note that there can be two distinct versions of harmonic coordinates in scalar-tensor theories, based on whether the
harmonic gauge condition g αβ Γσ  αβ = 0 is imposed on the metric in the Jordan frame or in the Einstein frame Minazzoli
and Chauvineau (2011); Deng and Xie (2012). This further complicates the discussion on the coordinate systems to be
used in alternative theories.
